1	“90% of African men prefer plus size women for marriage.”
2	A 51-year-old career diplomat in rimless glasses, Klein is Germany’s first federal Commissioner for Jewish Life in Germany and the Fight Against Anti-Semitism, a lengthy job title for a position that was created just last year.
3	A €64 million transfer isn’t quite the same thing.
4	AAA expects prices at the pump to drop by at least 10 cents in the coming weeks, as many drivers hit the road for summer vacations.
5	A autopsy will be performed at a later date in Newberry.
6	A bag of chips or a sugary donut is beacon for late-night hunger pangs.
7	A ball is played through to Ellen White, who is a half-step late in arriving as Aline charges out for it.
8	Abandoning Titans Tower, the heroes all go their separate ways.
9	Abby Jean Hendsbee earned an Acadia Renewable Scholar Award of $16,000, Acadia Renewable Scholar Award valued at $4,000, Acadia Residence Scholarship of $2,500, James Wilson Award for $275 and the A Roy Award of $50.
10	ABC’s editorial director Craig McMurtie speaks to media as the raid unfolded in Sydney.
11	Abdullahi Adan, the chairman of the Wadaag political think tank based in Mogadishu, said that the presence of Amisom is hindering them from strengthening their ability to fight Al Shabaab.
12	Abercrombie & Fitch (NYSE:ANF) last issued its earnings results on Thursday, November 29th.
13	A Beverly couple has been indicted on charges of prostitution and trafficking women for sex at a Salem brothel that authorities allege was a front for human trafficking, Attorney General Maura Healey said.
14	Abia people rejected them and overwhelmingly, transparently reelected Governor Ikpeazu for a second term, so as to enable him consolidate the gains made so far, during his first term.”
15	A billboard with an image of Democratic presidential hopeful Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-MA) in San Francisco, California.
16	A bipartisan report suggests that Trump's presidency has pushed federal science programs to a "crisis" point.
17	Abiy had been bookmakers’ second favorite to win, behind the teenage Swedish climate change campaigner Greta Thunberg.
18	A black and white cat sits calmly on a fence post, seemingly without a care in the world.
19	A book recently published in Switzerland will be of interest to readers worldwide – and they won't have to wait for it to be translated.
20	About 25 miles away.
21	About $900,000 was withdrawn as cash or sent to checking accounts overseas, according to an indictment.
22	About three years ago, I was struck by just how much change was happening in the city and how much building was happening, how much renovation is going on, new people moving to the city—just, you know, new energy.
23	A Brexit Party candidate branded Mr Farage's tactical decision not to contest Tory-held seats to avoid splitting the Leave vote as a 'disgrace to politics'.
24	A British man who shot dead his 6-year-old great-grandson with an air rifle has been sentenced to three years behind bars.
25	Absolutely by design.
26	Absolutely superb night at Shindig / Mainyard, this vocal goes perfect with pic.
27	“Access to clean and stable energy is a prerequisite for job creation and development.
28	Accompanying it is Riverside Park, which also offers a playground, a walking path and a softball diamond.
29	According the pie chart, the percentage of respondents who agreed that “I would be in danger if my identity were exposed” is still small, but it grew significantly between 2018 and 2019.
30	According to agent Savills’ 2019 global living report, Australian PBSA ranks as the most superior on measures such as affordability, regulations, student numbers and university rankings and fees.
31	According to a news release from the Calgary Police Service (CPS), officers arriving at the scene became involved in a confrontation with three people, which resulted in one officer firing their service weapon.
32	According to another order, Naseer Ahmad Wani, KAS, Additional Deputy Commissioner, Ganderbal has been transferred and posted as OSD with Advisor (KS) to the Governor.
33	According to AP VoteCast, a survey of more than 115,000 midterm voters nationwide, nearly 4 in 10 Democratic voters identified health care as the most important among a list of key issues.
34	According to a résumé she posted on LinkedIn, she spent the summer in Montana working as a tour guide at the Missoula Smokejumper Visitor Center.
35	According to Calderhead, who trained in the UK as a pathologist and who maintains a healthy Scottish accent, phototherapy has two true godfathers.
36	According to current scientific insights, the use of a shock collar is "a serious, inescapable violation of the welfare of the dog", Schouten wrote in a letter to parliament.
37	According to Data USA, 8,500 people were employed in the town of Murray in 2017, and the median household income was $27,282.
38	According to Dodd, the best way to measure how far his team has progressed since he took over the program at the beginning of last year is how they perform against the bigger schools and also common opponents.
39	According to experts analyzing the e-commerce giant's sudden cancellation of plans to build a massive headquarters in New York City, Amazon's decision to walk away could scare off other tech companies considering moving to or expanding in the city.
40	According to FiveThirtyEight, a Rams win would raise their playoff changes to 29 percent, a loss would drop the team to 8 percent.
41	According to Gradisher, these three videos are only a tiny fraction of UAPs that Navy trainees report seeing in training ranges.
42	According to her, the regulatory control will also build confidence in Nigerians about the medicines that are available in the country since SFs medicines can come in through importation.
43	According to him, if not for K1, the crisis would have been worse than that as he repeatedly talked to both warring parties to douse the tension.
44	According to him, while Ovia North East provided 25,329 hectares; Ovia South West had 36,759 hectares; while Orhionmwon and Uhunmwode provided 51,000 and 23, 000 hectares of land of land respectively.
45	According to Invest Saudi’s Fall 2019 Investment Highlights report, which was launched on the sidelines of FII, over 250 overseas businesses were granted investor licenses Q3 2019 - 30 per cent increase compared to the same period last year.
46	According to local news channel report, after receiving information about the incident, police personnel and teams arrived at the scene and rescued the victims.
47	According to Ludvik, the indirect influence of the Russian response was the most painful for fruit producers, because it is associated with long-term processes of farm development.
48	According to Lyman's affidavit, the owner of the store eventually met with Hoffman, with Hoffman admitting to taking the items and returning approximately half of the marijuana.
49	According to Miner, the vacation is designed to be family-friendly.
50	According to Ojukwu, there would be human rights awards to individuals, federal/state agencies and corporate institutions in recognition of their contributions to human rights protection in Nigeria.
51	According to one episode of The Beautiful World of Jeffree Star Jeffree Star said he could place another order as early as Nov. 4, 2019.
52	According to PETA Australia, the Melbourne Cup is “one of the cruellest days on Melbourne’s calendar”.
53	According to Pitt, it was a very natural desire.
54	According to police, a male tried to get into a resident’s home.
55	According to police, a Montford was taken into custody after officers found a knife they believe was used in the stabbing assault.
56	According to police, the 21-year-old man was driving a 2007 Chevrolet at a high rate of speed when he hit a curb and struck a utility pole.
57	According to recent numbers, the administration has not provided hurricane ravaged areas with aid that’s correlated to the magnitude of the storms' losses.
58	According to reports Caitlyn is set to pocket a cool £500,000 for the privilege of fending off cockroaches in the jungle for three weeks – one of the biggest pay days the show has ever dished out.
59	According to Taylor, a lot of the time it is these family members and friends who made her presence possible.
60	According to the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention, an average of 129 deaths by suicide occur per day and there are an estimated 1,400,000 suicide attempts per year.
61	According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, only 3.3 people live in Australia per square kilometer.
62	According to the boxing champion-turned-cleric, most African stars do not live long compared to their counterparts in the Western world.
63	According to the Kingston Central police, they were alerted about the body at 3:45 yesterday afternoon.
64	According to the MoU signed on Wednesday between MoPR and CSC e-Governance, Gram Panchayat Bhawans will host common service centres (CSCs), to provide easy access to government services and social schemes in rural areas.
65	According to the prosecutor, the offence contravenes Sections 97 and 221 of the Penal Code.
66	According to the report, all the external factors that expected to contribute towards its growth are the drivers in the Cellulase market.
67	According to the survey, 53% of riders also say they regularly use a bus stop with no shelter or amenities.
68	According to the Sustainable Business report, it is estimated that only 20 per cent of global e-waste is recycled each year, leaving 40 million tonnes to be placed in landfills, burned or illegally traded.
69	According to the Treasury Department’s Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), real estate wire fraud is estimated to cost the real estate industry approximately $48 million a month.
70	According to unconfirmed reports, over 100 gunmen who are yet to be identified, had invaded and opened fire on soldiers and police personnel stationed at the village, about 30 kilometres away from Anka Local Government headquarters.
71	A CCTV camera recorded Mr Bishop walking along the Chess driveway.
72	A child’s job used to simply be to grow up.
73	“A civilized marketplace of ideas is a nice sentiment, but it can’t exist when some of those ideas are inherently violent.
74	A clean air awareness campaign, possibly integrated with Swachh Bharat, which talks about the advantages of EV for the environment, the health of citizens and economic savings can also help, he added.
75	A commitment was made in June of 2014 to send tractors to clear the mountain roads in North Leeward, North Central Windward and then South Leeward before the 2015 elections.
76	A common criticism of the watchdog is that while it screens every complaint it refers the majority of complaints back to the police service in question to conduct an investigation.
77	A couple are awful enough to frighten small children.
78	A couple of cotton fields had been stripped, and harvest was expected to ramp up going into October.
79	A court in the United Kingdom has jailed a Nigerian man who swallowed 67 wraps of cocaine.
80	A criminal complaint is expected to be filed midweek, he said.
81	A crisis of masculinity … Emmet, voiced by Chris Pratt, in The Lego Movie 2: The Second Part.
82	Acting is such an emotional investment.
83	Action cartoons were at a real nadir at that time, and the hyper-kinetic storytelling and dynamic character designs struck a chord, and the show would stay on the network for a flabbergasting ten years.
84	Action News anchors Margot Kim and Cory James present several stories on why educators, health experts and emergency responders are expressing concern over vaping among youth.
85	Activists tried to get relief from the Bombay High Court, by approaching the court again on Saturday and seeking a stay to tree cutting, so that they could approach the Supreme Court.
86	Activities begin at 6 p.m. with a meal.
87	Act on what is present and needs to be handled.
88	Actor Michael Douglas has revealed that he had asked actress and his wife Catherine Zeta-Jones to tap dance in their bathroom.
89	" actor shared a Photoshopped picture of the 55-year-old host giving him a back hug.
90	Actress Garcelle Beauvais has joined the cast of ‘RHOBH,’ which was sprung on the cast when she showed up at Kyle Richards’ house to start filming immediately.
91	Actress Vandana Sajnani has always been an absolute livewire, wearing the mantle of a director and producer (of her own theatre company) with equal charm.
92	Act two of Italian populism, if Salvini is in charge, will put up a tough fight against anyone trying to get in its way.
93	“Actually, my plan was to become a civil servant,” Kristine offers.
94	A CV ought to be ordered, and shouldn’t to span over 1 web page.
95	A CV should be appropriately ordered, and ought not to length more than one page.
96	Adam Eli, a queer activist, was leaving the subway station at 28th Street and Broadway in Manhattan when he claims that a man he didn’t know confronted him and demanded that he “take that kippah off.”
97	Adam wants to get a list of his father’s medications to see if there are any contraindications, which gives Phyllis a pause.
98	A day earlier, Boloña was lobbying with other student officials in Tallahassee for internship opportunities.
99	A day earlier, on a damp pitch, they were 31 for one after six overs.
100	Adding a crosswalk between upper Main Street and lower Main Street also was discussed.
101	Adding to the complicated situation, Jim officially filed for divorce from Meghan on Oct. 25, following five years of marriage.
102	Add in the £935,000 cost of the land and the owners suggested the property cost a total of '£3.
103	Additionally, he thought that Watkins, who he outweighs by 20 pounds was being too rough, causing him to lose his cool.
104	Additionally, Maria Jurvejeva-Skuratovski, a former elder of Lasnamäe district who was elected to the Riigikogu, has extended the suspension of her mandate to the city council until 31 August.
105	Additional races this day will include a 5 km freestyle, 3 km youth freestyle, 5 km classic, 3 km youth classic and a KidK race.
106	Add to that at least 240 weekend voters and the total is up to 609 as we enter the final week of advance voting.
107	A deal was done though, between Durbin and then-Sen.
108	Adebayo moved his feet, made Durant go to a counter move then contested with his hand as close to Durant’s release as was humanly possible without fouling.
109	… A December poll showed 68 percent of Virginians approve of the Amazon deal, while 30 percent disapprove.”
110	A Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade spokesperson told staff were providing consular assistance to an Australian man detained in Singapore.
111	A development application has been lodged with Penrith Council, with plans for a two storey childcare centre on the 569.50sqm corner site of 70 Cadda Ridge Drive.
112	A diamond in the rough, is the smart, creative, and kind daughter of any parent's dreams.
113	A different photo shows the model looking almost unrecognizable, sporting a short, blue wig, and sticking out her tongue.
114	A Dinajpur court on Tuesday issued a warrant for the arrest of 23 people, including seven former managing directors of Barapukuria Coal Mining Company Limited (BCMCL), in a case filed over the disappearance of coal worth Tk 2.43 billion from the coalmine.
115	Adjusted for inflation, that’s equivalent to $1.1 million today.
116	Admittedly, not everyone was a fan of what Leto did with the character.
117	A dozen months later, he’s gone.
118	Adrian Peterson and the running game have been lousy all season.
119	A driverless car takes someone to the grocery store.
120	“Adult support is important,” Neubeck said, “but I think it’s really important that the group is run by students.
121	Advanced bone growth stimulators can also facilitate multi-level fusions, the efficiency of which plays a pivotal role in spine fusion aftercare of patients.
122	Advisor Group Inc. grew its holdings in shares of Kinsale Capital Group by 2,241.7% during the second quarter.
123	AdvisorNet Financial Inc raised its position in shares of XPO Logistics by 54.9% in the 2nd quarter.
124	Advisory Services Network LLC now owns 7,516 shares of the real estate investment trust’s stock worth $119,000 after acquiring an additional 2,350 shares in the last quarter.
125	AEW will also crown the first Women’s Champion in a match between Nyla Rose and Riho.
126	A family member of one of the victims left the courtroom in tears after the sentence.
127	A federal source began posing as a tipster for the accused cops in December 2017 and told Elizondo about the stash house on the West Side, the feds say.
128	‘A few hours later, after the hives had gone down, my husband suggested I read the ingredients in my lip balm.
129	A few hundred protesters streamed out of the campus early Monday in an apparent bid to escape, but they were driven back by police tear gas.
130	A few months who, Nollywood actress, Liz Anjorin revealed that she had been awarded Borokinni Adinni of Nigeria by the Islamic Foundation of Nigeria and threw a party to the effect.
131	A few showers and thunderstorms may pop up starting around 6 p.m. While severe weather is unlikely, pockets of heavier rain could impact the tail end of the evening commute and/or your outdoor evening plans.
132	A firefighter was lightly injured while working to extinguish the blaze by a gas tank that exploded, the Ynet news site reported.
133	A footballer terrified of the dentist accidentally killed himself with painkillers after refusing to get treatment for an excruciating toothache, an inquest has heard.
134	A former Likudnik, Kachlon bolted to found the Kulanu Party in 2014, notching an impressive ten seats in the 2015 election.
135	A former staffer at IT World Canada, she's now contributing as a part-time podcast host on Hashtag Trending.
136	A former world player of the year and 2015 World Cup winner, Retallick thought he was going to miss this tournament until a few days before the squad announcement.
137	A fourth officer is reported as hit.
138	A fresh review was ordered and in 2011 found that the pilots should not have been blamed and the earlier ruling was set aside.
139	African American men are historically undercounted more than men of any other racial group.
140	After 2 successful years and a World Series championship with the Astros, Morton returns.
141	After 50 years, the range of possibilities expands.
142	After a 2018-19 concert season during which SPCO audience members gazed out the towering windows of St. Paul’s Ordway Center upon a fenced-in park undergoing renovation, the year-long project is at last complete.
143	After a couple of hundred suicides, the minute you walk through the door you can smell the bad ones.
144	After a highly successful turn at Kickstarter, Sphero is bringing its latest RVR to consumers, educators, and students around the world to give them the chance to experience what it may feel like to control and program a space rover.
145	After all, there were so few of them, less than a million worldwide, and most are in northern Iraq.
146	After all, “Ubis jus ubis remedium” (Where there is a wrong, there must be a remedy).
147	After a "nationwide search," the Bellevue Chamber of Commerce hired Fain as their CEO, reports.
148	After another preteen boy performed drag in Ohio, state Republicans proposed legislation barring these performances, linking them, without evidence, to child trafficking.
149	After an outstanding opening half of the season when Dortmund played fast-paced, free-flowing attacking soccer, the young team threw its lead away in the second half.
150	After a Tigers’ punt to start the fourth quarter, the Bulldogs pushed the lead to 20 points.
151	After a trip around the nation, “We Will Rock You” will have tour dates in Canada.
152	After a Trudeau rally held in Ottawa during the stretch run, Liberal MP Greg Fergus, from a nearby Quebec riding, mused about unignorable parallels with the Pierre Trudeau 1972 minority setback.
153	After being fitted with a prosthetic he told CNN in 2012 that he worked hard for two years to beat the odds and walk again.
154	After being given repeated orders to drop the gun and get on the ground, the man complied, the sheriff’s office said.
155	After Bolsonaro was elected, he transferred the regulation of indigenous reserves to the agricultural ministry of Brazil, an entity controlled by corporate agribusiness lobbyists.
156	After class, we remain in the pool to share funny jokes along with memories of family and friends no longer with us.
157	After failing to find work in St. John’s, Lagace moved to Edmonton three months ago to try to change his life.
158	After Fiona Hill blasted lawmakers on the Hill for sharing a Russian-created conspiracy theory about Ukraine hacking the 2016 U.S. election, Trump went on FOX News and again repeated the bogus allegation.
159	After galloping around with his parents and three siblings, they all settled in Irving, TX., in 1963.
160	After graduation, he was hired by a start-up called Tangerine to work in their industrial design group.
161	After his critically-acclaimed Netflix show Ozark, Hollywood star Jason Bateman will be helming a Netflix comedy featuring WWE champion and movie star John Cena, according to a report by the Screen Rant.
162	After his death, Toland finds himself in ".
163	"After I got the rhythm, I heated up a little bit.
164	After losing its first Somali council member, the community reacts to the City Council's replacement.
165	After losing the first set to a far more experienced opponent she turned things around to claim a first-ever Wimbledon main victory, 4-6 6-4 6-4.
166	After making 2 of 17 shots to open the second half, Duke (22-2, 10-1 Atlantic Coast Conference) got hot to make 9 of 13 and shut down the Cardinals over the final 9:54.
167	After mentioning cyberattacks by state and non-state actors and China’s expansionist activities in the Indo-Pacific region, Dutton said a frank conversation was the right one.
168	After moving forwards Mark Stone, Matt Duchene and Ryan Dzingel, the Ottawa Senators’ failures are laid bare.
169	After moving into journalism, he was principal business reporter for Radio Television Hong Kong before the handover to China.
170	After no trades were accepted and no extension was reached, the Chargers decided to put off further contact discussions until the end of the season.
171	After only eating between one to two meals a day in the past, Jaden Smith looked strong and healthy to catch waves in Malibu on Sept. 24!
172	After Phyllis Summers (Michelle Stafford) warns Adam that Nick’s onto him, he’ll decide something must be done.
173	After practice Monday, Rivers said he’s tried to take the early setbacks in stride: “It is frustrating at times, I guess, but it’s nothing I lose sleep over right now.”
174	After putting away his instrument, Barr came to the podium and said he wanted to explain how this had come about.
175	After Reacher fans complained that Cruise was too small to play the big bruiser, and Cruise coaxed the first film’s director, Christopher McQuarrie, to his “Mission: Impossible” franchise, Paramount decided two Reacher films were enough.
176	After reviewing market and economic trends in the Nixon and Clinton impeachment periods, economists at Cornerstone Macro found that whatever had preceded the political tumult simply continued.
177	After Sandy Hook, Watts founded her group, joined with Everytown for Gun Safety and worked with Giffords to increase grassroots outreach and lobbying for gun control.
178	After seeing Saturday’s performance, it seems quite possible that collegiate track programs out there might try to capitalize on his raw athleticism to move him to pursue a track career.
179	After selection it is another two years of training before launching to the space station.
180	After that he became operations manager for Manitoba Telecom Services in Winnipeg, where he headed and planned all web hosting endeavours for the company’s provincial operations.
181	After that, no word or action follows.
182	After that, the athletes participated in a group warm up under the guidance of Adaptive Physical Education Director Sean Corson.
183	After that was done, I started shooting.
184	After the break the away fans let off flares which Zelazny felt "knocked" Rangers and hindered their momentum.
185	After the gossip began to rise, Tommie explained what went down in one of her IG stories.
186	After the keto flu has passed, long-term keto dieters often say they have gained increased focus and energy.
187	After the news of Luck’s retirement leaked to the media during a meaningless preseason game, fans booed Luck as he walked off the field for the last time.
188	After the release of in 2006, Human Head wrestled with various problems.
189	After the third session he refused to go.
190	After the Titans drafted Simmons, they showed the fight clip on live TV and rather than talk about his play-making abilities they lambasted him as a possible problem for the Titans as a women beater.
191	After the verdict, Mr. Wisner said in a statement, “The jury saw for themselves internal company documents demonstrating that, from Day 1, Monsanto has never had any interest in finding out whether Roundup is safe.”
192	After this feat against PSG, United is slowly establishing that they are still in the game.
193	After Truth vs. Akira Tozawa, the gauntlet picked up nicely with Tozawa vs. Ricochet.
194	After two and a half years in Stateville, Myles was transferred to Menard Correctional Center, far downstate on the banks of the Mississippi.
195	After Wednesday night’s exploits, how can anyone else have a better claim to the title of sprint queen of the world?
196	After Wexner's birthday party, Glenn went to his home in Ohio while Dershowitz flew on Epstein's plane back to his own home in Boston, Dershowitz said.
197	A further decision, to approve procedures and mechanisms on compliance with the Rotterdam Convention – seen as a crucial step for further improving implementation of this key convention – was adopted with great appreciation by Parties.
198	A future human versus a future robot is a way cleaner conflict than a future robot versus a reprogrammed future robot.
199	Again, in December 2013 the Bank of Ghana (Notice No. BG/GOV/SEC/2013/08) increased the minimum capital requirement to GHS120 million for new entrants and existing licensed Class 1 banks.
200	Again, let's give them credit for getting something right.
201	Again, Mattis’s actions then were nowhere near the level we’ve seen directed at President Trump.
202	Again, Paul had the same inward struggle.
203	Again, suggesting that we’re losing footing.”
204	Again, that should keep us near-normal for this time of year, with highs in the upper 80s to low 90s.
205	Again, that will pass $900M once tomorrow's weekend box office report comes in.
206	Agatha and the Death of X is set in the Blitz in 1940s London, as the author decides she must kill off her most famous creation, and in doing so, becomes a target herself.
207	Agencies must offer "genuine justifications for important decisions, reasons that can be scrutinized by courts and the interested public," Roberts wrote.
208	A generation or two earlier, the neighborhood was full of workers, fishermen, whores, gamblers, resident or gypsy loggers, and travelers meeting the ferry.
209	A German public health researcher, — who had recently published a book on my grandfather’s pioneering work in infant and children’s healthcare — asked if he could request the Stolpersteine be placed in front of the home my father left behind.
210	A glaring example of this is our requirement that local sales taxes be paid to some 58 local sales tax collectors across Louisiana.
211	A glass pipe commonly used to smoke methamphetamine also was found in the vehicle.
212	A good 70% of people believe they are better than average drivers.
213	A good relationship between themselves and the farming community also been ensured on a long-term basis through their technological support and other assistances.
214	“A great moment for Gavin and great moment for his family.”
215	Agriculture innovation will be an essential factor in India’s reorganisation of sectoral workforces (FE, ‘Urbanise India to eliminate poverty’; bit.
216	A group of eight former Labour officials have come forward to accuse party chief Jeremy Corbyn and his closest aides of systemically interfering in efforts to address anti-Semitism within the British party.
217	A group of Grade 4 students spotted an error on several street signs in Stellarton.
218	A group of students took position outside the vice-chancellor’s office on Tuesday demonstrating for a seven-point charter of demand, including justice for Abrar murder.
219	A guy was playing ‘The Star-Spangled Banner’ on the fiddle,” Hammer recalls.
220	A handful of eateries are offering specials, and we’ve rounded them up.
221	Ah but there is an economic benefit in all this… Well yes somebody benefits otherwise nobody would be proposing to invest the money but who?
222	Ahead of their flight to Vegas, Mr Aitchison, who along with his wife had spent £9,000 on flights with Thomas Cook posted on Twitter: "Five days ago travel and wedding plans in tatters.
223	Ahead of the sold-out Spring Game, KRVN Sports Director Jayson Jorgensen spoke with Sean Callahan of Husker Online.
224	Ahmad Abouammo earlier this month was indicted on spying charges along with Ali Alzabarah, another former Twitter employee, and Ahmed Almutairi, who worked for the Saudi royal family.
225	Aid agencies should be champions for gender equality – so why do female employees face violence and discrimination from men who see them as ‘too pretty for complex issues’?
226	AIG President and CEO Brian Duperreault has previously insisted that its General Insurance unit will generate an underwriting profit “on average” for all of 2019, regardless of catastrophes.
227	A in the journal Food Policy estimates that a kilo of beef protein reared on a British hill farm whose soils are rich in carbon has a cost of 643kg, while a kilo of lamb protein costs 749kg.
228	Airlines in China and Norway have said they want compensation for their grounded planes.
229	Airmic supports members through: training and research; sharing information; a diverse programme of events; encouraging good practice; and lobbying on subjects that directly affect our members.
230	A joint security force of 48, 000 officers and other ranks had been deployed to provide security across the nation, while Coalition of Domestic Election Observers has deployed 1,100 persons to observe and monitor the polls.
231	A judge in Kentucky blocked enforcement of that state’s heartbeat ban after the American Civil Liberties Union filed suit on behalf of the clinic in Louisville.
232	“A key advantage of studying in Ireland is that students can avail of up to two years ‘stay-back’ option after completing their course, at postgraduate level.
233	Akshat, a JNU student, told PTI, "The students' union has not been informed by the ministry about the formation of a panel.
234	Alaa Sheikhi, 24, was sentenced to nine and a half years in prison by the Chemnitz higher regional court on Thursday.
235	Alaina Kosko, of Rochester, recently enrolled at Tufts University in Massachusetts.
236	A large portion of the mall parking lot on Ness Avenue near Moray Street was cordoned off with police tape.
237	Alaska National Insurance Co.Business Moves & MergersCopperPoint Insurance Cos.
238	A Last Cowboy Standing Series and Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association will entertain those in attendance.
239	Alberta Premier Jason Kenney posted this photo to his Twitter account Tuesday after a dust-up with the NDP over government purchases made at Prestige Liquor.
240	Albert explains that the handle bar is for people with carpal tunnel syndrome — since it’s intended to relieve some of the pressure put on the rider’s wrists — and people with spinal injuries, since the rider remains in an upright position.
241	Alcohol lobby says new pregnancy warning labels 'too expensive'
242	Aldis then takes command with a slow, steady offense, nothing flashy.
243	Alexandria plays the McCook/Miner vs. Parkston winner at 5:30 p.m. on Friday.
244	Alex Cruz, British Airways’ Chairman and CEO, said: “All of us at British Airways are indebted to Barbara Jane Harrison.
245	Algoma University, established in Sault Ste. Marie in 1965, offers a wide range of degrees and certificates spanning the liberal arts, sciences, and professional disciplines.
246	Alhaji Mohammadu Umar, Permanent Secretary, Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, had said that the settlements when fully established, would address the incessant clashes between herders and farmers.
247	Al-Hawl camp, Syria: Australia Street is a few tents for the former families of Islamic State perched on a dusty hillock at the far outer edge of al-Hawl refugee camp.
248	Ali Al Salem’s small maintenance and repair team is a unit comprised of five Airmen from each of CE’s cores: plumbing, HVAC (heating, ventilation and air conditioning), structures and electrical.
249	A little ball of it keeps sticking to him, his own personal tumbleweed.
250	'A little mistake or a little delay and you can miss your entrance.
251	A little Satanism would probably improve things.
252	All are expected to be blocked by federal courts, with ban supporters hoping appeals might lead to the U.S. Supreme Court.
253	All Blacks captain for the game Sam Whitelock prepares for the match against Namibia today.
254	"All Boeing airplanes are certified and delivered to the highest levels of safety consistent with industry standards.
255	All eyes are on the quarterback competition in Washington, but few are fixed on the wide receiver room, where one under-the-radar pass-catcher is making a name for himself in the slot.
256	“All I can say is thanks to all the players I’ve played alongside, all the staff that have helped me in their own way, the chairman and of course the amazing fans.”
257	Allied Investment Advisors LLC increased its stake in shares of Apple by 0.5% during the fourth quarter.
258	“All I heard was that it was unfounded,” Tager said.
259	All India Trinamool Congress (TMC) MP Nushrat Jahan participated in 'sindoor khela' in Kolkata on Oct 11. She was accompanied by her husband Nikhil Jain at Chaltabagan Durga Puja Pandal.
260	All Nerds Night: End of NYCC 2019, Michael’s Cosplay, O’Lunney’s Times Square Pub, 145 W 45th St, New York 6pm-late.
261	All of the phones featured here are well under this benchmark.
262	All of these performances were received with great applause.
263	All of these teams stress teamwork, chemistry, camaraderie and playing as a unit.
264	All of the victims have since been moved from the vehicle to Broomfield Hospital in Chelmsford for post-mortem examinations to be carried out.
265	All of this will be playing out just weeks before the Iowa caucuses.
266	All of which brings us back to the WorthLess? campaign.
267	All of which is as clear as mud in the wretchedly-structured first half of the show.
268	All road users are reminded to use roads with due care and attention.
269	All six attorneys-general are Democrats.
270	All smartphones are usually subject to technical testing by DisplayMate.
271	All stakeholders need to act together and not blame each other,” the Minister said.
272	All-State recipients — along with the Miss Maine Field Hockey winner — will be honored at the MFHA banquet on Sunday, Dec. 8 at 1 p.m. at the Augusta Civic Center.
273	“All states have different prevailing situations therefore minimum wages vary accordingly.
274	All the 15 shutters remain open in view of the continuing rains.
275	All the children were taken to hospital when they were discovered, and Riverside County authorities have taken temporary conservatorship over the adults.
276	All the gear inside to go outside!
277	All the signs are they recognise that such a Referendum should be conclusive while a General Election would be all too likely to be inclonclusive.
278	All the stuff that you have to have to be successful.”
279	All the three digital businesses under Axiata Digital Services, Boost, ADA and Apigate have been growing their respective revenues in the double-digits every year historically, and they did well in 1H2019.
280	All the while he researched Armenian nautical history and architecture.
281	“All they were interested in was making money by showing something and claiming something else.
282	"All this remains part of the plans of the general staff of the Russian armed forces," he added.
283	All this time, one Stanley Leiber had been working his way up from general office assistant at Timely Comics, to writer and editor.
284	“All three programs have needs in all areas,” said Pos about the fundraiser and the band programs.
285	All trade union rights have been abolished in the country.
286	“All you need to do is bring your copy of the Tele into the reception area of our city centre offices and find out what you have won – it really is that simple.
287	Almost $60,000 was raised in only a few weeks, and just over $40,000 remains after two years of operation.
288	“Almost felt like it could lift the house.”
289	“Almost our whole team was from Mercer, and we could really play.”
290	Almost two thirds of Australian universities rose in the 2020 Times Higher Education (THE) World University Rankings, announced on Thursday.
291	A LONDON Irish firm has won one of the largest ever fixed-price construction contracts to be awarded in the UK.
292	Alongside the heroin and cocaine, the officers found an iPhone, £1,310 in cash, and a ‘burner’ phone.
293	Alongside them was Keir Starmer, who spent the entire event perched bolt upright, barely moving a muscle, as though someone had buried the muzzle of a revolver into the small of his back.
294	Alongside this, he said that the defendant was "deeply ashamed" and "guilt ridden" and had even "attempted to take her own life when confronted on what she had done".
295	Along with Tamil, these industries traditionally make more films than Kannada.
296	Along with targeting the Obama-era Clean Power Plan, the administration moved ahead on proposals to reduce environmental protections on coal ash, mercury emissions from coal plants, and other smokestack pollutants.
297	Along with the 2017 convictions, Sinnett was also found guilty of falsely reporting a crime in 2015 and theft in 2014.
298	A look at original forest in the Amazon.
299	A lot has been said about the season opener, but how it all plays out remains to be seen.
300	“A lot of badly run companies are trying to blame tariffs,” he told reporters before heading to Camp David.
301	A lot of lawyers answer their e-mail at night – and many do so after having several libations.
302	A lot of other astrologers are writing about this event.
303	A lot of presidential campaigns haven’t paid the bills.
304	A lot of times that’s for the best, because the people involved have grown up and have had the space and time to clarify their feelings.
305	ALPS Sector Dividend Dogs ETF accounts for 8.9% of Reitz Capital Advisors LLC’s portfolio, making the stock its 4th largest holding.
306	Al-Qaeda Leader Urges Attacks on US, European, Israeli and Russian Targets in 9/11 Speech - Reports - Sputnik InternationalOur website uses cookies to improve its performance and enhance your user experience.
307	Already, beaches are eroding into the bay at alarming rates.
308	Already, they know there are more than that in 2020.
309	“Al’s been amazing,” Simmons said.
310	Also, applying Burt’s Bees Beeswax Lip Balm around your hairline prevents color from sticking to your skin, and its peppermint scent can be soothing too.
311	Also considers Spider-Man to be the greatest superhero of all time.
312	Also, CTO Philip Ryan Sr. Barros sold 28,457 shares of the firm’s stock in a transaction that occurred on Wednesday, February 13th.
313	Also, Director Debra L. Reed bought 4,250 shares of the company’s stock in a transaction dated Wednesday, August 7th.
314	Also, Director Michael S. Perry sold 100,000 shares of Arrowhead Pharmaceuticals stock in a transaction on Monday, September 9th.
315	Also, even though there are higher rates of alexithymia in people with autism, there are equally high rates in people with eating disorders, depression, substance abuse, schizophrenia and many other psychiatric and neurological conditions.
316	Also, “health,” blah blah blah, it’s really about the bikini.
317	Also, he's just stupid.
318	Also, income inequality — and all the social and political challenges that come with it — tends to be lower in redder metros.
319	Also, insider Matthew Jeffs sold 9,109 shares of the company’s stock in a transaction on Thursday, March 28th.
320	Also in the heat was Chatham-born fashion designer Zandra Rhodes, who scared Joey Essex by wielding an oversized kebab skewer at top London Indian restaurant Kahani.
321	Also in true AAA fashion, the wrestling action was a blast to watch.
322	Also, it has been benefiting from improving credit quality in consumer real estate portfolio and has witnessed enhanced profitability ratios as well, which keeps us encouraged.
323	Also, the discussion between them is interesting and nicely changed Angel’s view.
324	Also to have your little ghouls and goblins buckled-up when the vehicle is in motion.
325	Although a handful of schools have made anti-pollution masks compulsory for all students, barely any child is seen wearing one while out in the evenings as parents turn a blind eye towards the seriousness of the situation.
326	Although box creation isn’t a perfect measurement, it does give us a much better understanding about what each player brings to the table when it comes to generating offense.
327	Although exact details are slim, not least the price, the course is designed to stimulate all five senses of diners.
328	Although focused on the school year, the data also reflect time use during school holidays, such as spring break.
329	Although it was challenging to stay in college â€” let alone graduate school â€” and work toward a fulfilling career, Abbey did what was best for her family's future.
330	“Although I was born in Udupi, but I had spent my entire life in Bengaluru, doing all my shows in Bengaluru, Mumbai, and other places in India.
331	Although many countries around the world have abolished capital punishment, death penalty is still practiced in some countries including China, the United States, Indonesia, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Iran.
332	Although recreational marijuana sales are still illegal in Colombia, the plant is legal for certain medical uses in that country, and personal cultivation and consumption are decriminalized.
333	Although she has earned a 4.0 GPA, is taking graduate classes as an undergraduate and works with underprivileged children in the community, Anderson said she didn’t think her accomplishments were worthy of a Rhodes Scholarship.
334	Although she previously told she is not looking forward to flying back and forth from South Africa once the series commences.
335	Although the National Secretary was not available for comments, the PDP national leadership has consistently declared that it would not interfere with any of the processes leading to the emergence of a candidate for the election.
336	Although the unit was still being organized, approximately 450 paratroopers drew weapons, equipment, and parachutes.
337	Although the video garnered over 400,000 views and nearly 10,000 shares, real Cajun people were not having it and they didn't hold back in the comments.
338	Although your mileage may vary, that’s quite an endorsement for the free tool.
339	A Mail on Sunday reporter tried to put questions to Mrs Mutharika at her hotel, but was told by a concierge who put a call through to a room that she did not wish to speak to the press.
340	A major giving program and more commercial revenue ventures (adding to its sponsorships and jobs board) are also in the works.
341	Amalie Eikeland (Norway) wins a free kick in the defensive half.
342	A man aged in his 70s is in a serious but stable condition on Saturday afternoon after he fell three metres from a ladder in an area ravaged by bushfires.
343	A man visits the new ‘House of Fates’ Holocaust museum, housed in what was the former ‘Jozsefvarosi’ railway station in Budapest on January 21, 2019.
344	A man was rushed to a trauma centre last night after an overnight shooting on Queen Street West near Dovercourt.
345	A man was taken down by police after he started a fire at a gas station north of downtown late Thursday afternoon.
346	A man who is outraged by ad hominem slurs has “Tucker Carlson is a white supremacist” in the same bio.
347	A map of Missouri.
348	A map under the link in the preceding sentence shows the area of the specific plan.
349	Amazon is in advanced talks with UK car manufacturers to sell vehicles directly to the public via its website.
350	Amazon previously only allowed free returns on shoes, bedding and apparel.
351	Amazon’s “technology and content” expense rose 25 percent to just over $9 billion in the second quarter.
352	A media report on a meeting of officials from the Finance Ministry, the Financial Services Agency and the Bank of Japan on Friday afternoon served as a cue for investors to buy back the dollar, a currency broker said.
353	A memorial service for Staff Sgt. Adam Erickson was held at Chapel 1 on Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., Sept. 20, 2019.
354	American Airlines and United Airlines both consider it a key base.
355	American Airlines Group (NASDAQ:AAL) last announced its quarterly earnings data on Thursday, July 25th.
356	American and Singapore both said Friday that they have never activated the cameras and have no plans to use them.
357	American intelligence analysts are poring over satellite imagery of the attacks.
358	American Music Awards are taking place Nov. 24 at the Microsoft Theatre in Los Angeles, Calif.
359	American parents have long told their kids "Stand up for yourself."
360	American Sheep Industry Association President Benny Cox said this announcement is welcomed by our nation’s sheep producers.
361	American, United and Delta said none of their Boeing 737s needed to be checked within seven days but they have some that will need inspections over the next few months.
362	Amid revelations that the Trump administration would be proposing eliminating all funding for the Special Olympics, Democratic Sen. Dick Durbin chastised Secretary Betsy DeVos, saying the idea deserved a “Special Olympic gold medal for insensitivity.”
363	Am I going to spend the rest of my life alone?
364	A million bottles a minute: world's plastic binge 'as dangerous as climate change'
365	AMN has been the topic of several analyst reports.
366	Among routes being planned by the airline are 12 domestic destinations, 37 in Europe and 35 long-haul.
367	Among second-weekend holdovers, Sony Affirm’s Kendrick brothers teen athlete faith-based pic has a second weekend of at 1,827, -30%, for a 4-day of and 11-day of $19.2M.
368	“Amongst his comments, Mr Corbyn accused ‘billionaire owners like Mike Ashley’ of ‘ruining our national game’, claiming these ‘bad owners’ put their ‘business interests above everything else’ and risk their clubs’ financial security.
369	Among such players was David Luiz, who was one of Emery’s last minute high profile signings in the summer.
370	Among the cricketers, Aakash Chopra and expressed their displeasure about the clashes in Jamia Milia Islamia.
371	A more active approach may be the better way.
372	A more full description of these patterns will be revealed at convocation, but Aguilar said one main theme the group observed was that those who took the survey wished to see a more cohesive community at Willamette.
373	Amos Silver plants cannabis by the side of the street in Israel.
374	Amrinder Singh replaced Gurpreet under the bar, with Adil Khan, Thapa, Vinit Rai, Farukh Choudhary, Balwant Singh coming into the starting eleven, along with Amarjit Singh and Raynier Fernandes.
375	Amy had a minor wobble when newcomer Mollie Mae picked her man Curtis to join her for a date in the hot tub.
376	An 81-year-old man injured in a previously unreported August crash in the southeast valley died five days after he was hospitalized, Las Vegas police announced Wednesday.
377	An alliance in which the democracies, particularly Western democracies, rely upon to defend ourselves from those who oppose democracy.
378	Analysis between the two groups showed that in the following five-year period, those who missed the grant produced more top-cited papers than those who received the grant.
379	Analysts on average had expected a decline of only one percentage point.
380	Analysts predict that Public Storage will post 10.77 earnings per share for the current fiscal year.
381	An animal cruelty investigation of a New Jersey couple has been opened.
382	An apology to his family for what he put them through, to the court and to anyone affected by his actions came from Pasek himself just minutes before his sentencing.
383	An appraisal well at Calypso is still pending.
384	An artist rendering of a high school fitness room.
385	And after all, isn’t Freedom, what Independence Day is all about?
386	And after J.K. Simmons' surprise appearance revealing Peter Parker's identity as the wall crawler, it was shown that Nick Fury and Maria Hill weren't actually in the movie, but were Talos and Soren in disguise.
387	And a journey is the best way.
388	And almost 10 years since they last collaborated, Will insisted that he’d’ love to work with the former Girls Aloud singer again.
389	And are there really any "extra" pints of beer?
390	And as Law&Crime previously reported, Giuliani met with the former Ukrainian chief prosecutor on numerous occasions to push the investigation into the Biden family.
391	And Aztec’s Tristen McNeal picked it up and ran the other way for a touchdown.
392	And being aware of what is needed to work on to qualify for selection in the Amajita set-up.”
393	And both of these pieces, to me, seem to speak to that.”
394	And clearly, we don't expect the execution issues we have in Americas to continue into the second half.
395	And coach Bruce Boudreau has seen enough to know he has seen too much from a perimeter team unwilling to absorb punishment while squeezing their sticks into sawdust.
396	And creatively I just feel like I needed to go through what I went through in order to be the person that I am today.”
397	And dinner doesn’t always need to be cooked.
398	And don’t ask me about mine until you see this gone.
399	And, don’t get Melania wrong, so are the children’s parties, but, gosh, you can really let your hair down around little humans who are there to provide florals and enthusiasm.
400	And Edelman sounds open to appearing in some of these productions too, telling Deadline he’s been interested in acting since junior high.
401	And even Toronto admits the results of its safe injection sites so far are mixed.
402	And for children, it’s irritating to have to cease your video game appropriate in the midst of a stage!
403	And forget the easy three points - Tonga are setting for a scrum!
404	And for them and for Stephen Amell on Arrow, these shows will go out the way they were supposed to go,” he said.
405	And Grosel isn’t one to shy away from contact.
406	And guess what, Fark?
407	And he added to cheers and applause: “If they tell us they don’t want us to vote again, it’s because they know that now we will be voting knowing the truth of what Brexit represents.”
408	And he asked the gymnosophist, who is doing - sitting on a rock doing nothing, just staring at the sky.
409	And he earned thunderous cheers when he reentered the stage for the encore holding aloft a filled wine glass and proceeded to take a deep pull.
410	And he emphasized that he absolutely believes Trubisky still gives his team the best chance to win, if healthy.
411	And he's a champion player."
412	And he was not impressed with England's two midfield pivots Jordan Henderson and Declan Rice.
413	And how do you join?
414	And I came out to Carmel, and it was so nice.
415	And if these numbers are reached, DUK could trade in the $115 range.
416	And if you didn’t already think the adults in the room were dumb, they made it even dumber.
417	And if you maintain a private account with the intention of only sharing your content with close friends and family, this level of access might make you even more uncomfortable.
418	And if you’re in the movie business, where it’s all about looks, it would be tempting to fake the follicles instead, in the same way actors start pumping their faces full of Botox.
419	And if you signed up for credit monitoring, you can file a claim for $125 instead to cover that expense.
420	And I keep reading that it could take up to two months to get refunded.’
421	And I’m not talking about for Detroit.
422	And, in a way, this is how Red Flag laws function.
423	And in China, the country’s CCTV also reported gas cylinder explosions in March and April in Xianyang City and in Wuxi, Jiangsu.
424	And in it, he said he heard Trump's "loud and recognizable" voice repeatedly inquire about a potential Ukrainian investigation into the Bidens.
425	And, in typical millennial fashion, Spiegel’s pornography comes with a side helping of purpose.
426	And it appears that she also sought a monetary payment from NBC.
427	And it comes less than a week after court documents revealed that Facebook allowed children to rack up huge bills on digital games and that it had rejected recommendations for addressing it for fear of hurting revenue growth.
428	And it didn’t go so well.
429	And I think I needed both!
430	And it is particular stressful in the current market, as experts warn that 'gazundering is back', where buyers drop their offer just before exchanging contracts.
431	And it motivates him.
432	“And it’s a very simple medium.
433	And it’s not just the high school where officers have seen issues.
434	And it’s why I love how my son is having fun with music, but also studying music at the same time.
435	And it will be entirely relatable to anyone who’s name is even a tiny bit out of the ordinary.
436	And it will come with a price to pay.
437	And I when say brain score, I mean your communication with others.”
438	And judged on that scale, “The Dirt” isn’t even the glorified version.
439	And just a week after we told how a Brit woman lost six pints of blood after falling off a ride at the Aqualand park in Tenerife tearing her uterus.
440	And Kirsten Moore-Towers and Michael Marinaro won the pairs short program.
441	“And letting people connect with the power of dance, and letting it change and inspire and challenge them.”
442	And lo, a masterpiece was born.
443	And make no mistake his triumph has presented a gleaming new jewel to adorn the UAE sporting calendar.
444	And niggas ain’t hit you with none of the usual politics, like, “Nah, Cole finna get on this shit” or whoever.
445	And no one was more jealous of him than Richard and Paul and Butch.
446	And no one will change that: he’s won lots of things here.
447	And no will likely forget seeing school board chairman Dave Wasgatt in "bee hair."
448	And now, we arrive at the three variations of Evil.
449	And of course, they had their fair share of ups and downs in their marriage, including disagreements.
450	And, of course, this farm is not the only one in southern Addison County with water quality problems.
451	"And – oh my god – I pray to god it isn't Pauline Hanson."
452	And one tape he stumbled across as part of this project was Peter and Jess’s album.
453	And on Monday, one of those candidates, Representative Tim Ryan of Ohio, swore in after Mr. Trump’s “Toledo” comment.
454	And on that front, it’s worth talking about the Pac-12’s costs.
455	And on that note, we, for one, would like to welcome our new insect overlords.
456	And our exclusive clip might just give you a clue or two as to who (or what) that ghost may be!
457	And our form of government — popular rule exerted through law — demands adherence to legal texts as their originators meant them.
458	Andrea Clausen for the Chamber of Commerce and Martin Slater from FIDC were also in Aberdeen said MLA Spink, “so they were able to explain about local content, utilizing local companies where possible in supply of services to the oil companies.”
459	Andreadakis sees Costco as an example of how “loyalty” and “digital strategies” can make a difference in competing in the crowded retail space.
460	Andre rushes to go so speak to Tiana to prove Lucious wrong.
461	Andrew desired to enter into the race because there weren’t any black people in the race and there never were.
462	Andrus explained that it’s the favorite song of 20-month-old Elvis Jr., and if you’re not trying to make your kid happy, what are you doing?
463	And she’s credited as integral to RPAL’s efforts to provide uplifting activities to underserved local youth.
464	And so I am sure the truckloads of thoughts and prayers on their way, the gun debate cycle spiraling to nowhere gets an extra little push to keep it going and let the mantras and obfuscations begin.
465	And so I didn’t know.
466	And, something that is becoming noteworthy for him, without a single six!
467	And sometimes I get rung up by neighbours who say 'I've got a flax plant that's too big and you can have it'."
468	And Teachers are the single most important factor in making this happen.
469	And that conduct, that unethical conduct can be of a financial nature, if you have a financial motive or illicit business dealing, am I right?
470	And that cost is increasing as the government privatises the bus network.
471	And that’s not an accident: Dyner’s move to Europe was meant to put her in the sport’s hotbed and springboard her development.
472	And that's not cool, unlike McDonald's McFlurry, a delicious ice cream treat.
473	And that’s what made us so dangerous.”
474	“And that’s why, across Europe, we have the best possible solutions to combat that.
475	And that will tell us who we really are.
476	And the answer is so simple it's almost off-putting: raise f—ing taxes for the super rich."
477	And, the big thing is we have one this Saturday and we have another opportunity on the national stage.”
478	And the captain of the guard simply says to David, "Sit over there, and play and sing for the king.
479	And the engineer.
480	And the fact that the debate will be carried on regular broadcast airwaves — rather than the more libertine environment of cable — means the network could face penalties from federal regulators if obscenities are transmitted into Americans’ living rooms.
481	And the Insight has not had an easy life.
482	And the latest incident took place in North Dagon Township.
483	And then I’m like, I’m in a neon sweatsuit the next day and all kinds of crazy things.
484	And then, it all fell apart.
485	And then on offense, we are forcing things and normally our defense drives our offense so it wasn’t working, but we were able to calm down, regroup and be able to do better in the second half.”
486	And then quite unexpectedly, maybe as it turned out serendipitously, drew up a contract.
487	'And then something else happened — a whole wave of people started saying 'Hang on…' and they started to have a dialogue with one another.'
488	And then, will Trump address the audience for 20-30 minutes?
489	And then you noted a couple of basis points perhaps of NIM compression.
490	And the other reason I couldn’t go to mainstream TV is that Willow is not built for that kind of conventional set-up.
491	And the overwhelming push from her customers helps motivate Murray to continue creating and baking.
492	And the promotion isn’t just attracting viewers that are new to Combate, it’s attracting viewers that are new to MMA.
493	And the puzzle is complicated by this: The Yankees are the only team in the majors not to use a reliever three straight days.
494	And the reason why the sun rises everyday?
495	And there will always be a next one, as long as YouTube remains open to allowing anyone with an internet connection to upload a video.
496	And these hours weren't entirely solitary - people often chatted to bed-fellows or had sex.
497	And the storm water drains constructed in clay soil regions are faulty, without any provision to recharge the underground water table,” he said.
498	And they are such fascinating people.”
499	And they continue to, you know, mine the arts and culture and quality of life, and they get it.
500	And they have been trying to destroy the legitimate government since 53 years ago,” the President explained.
501	'And they know that.
502	“And they’ll say, ‘Well, don’t have sugar, then.
503	“And they need sustainable funding.”
504	And they need to worry about it.
505	And they’re not just needed when an injury occurs.
506	And they're saying these U.S. media reports sound to them like pulp fiction.
507	And this isn’t cheap for the home owners and local businesses forced to rely on generators.
508	And this is the rub.
509	And this is where artificial intelligence enters the picture for telephone companies, Internet service providers and other players in the telco industry.
510	And this morning she went even further as she launched her party's general election manifesto in Glasgow by calling for a massive increase in the NHS budget north of the border.
511	And this time, the Gophers were trailing 1-0 after Fiser’s eighth pitch.
512	And though China beat India in 2018, for two years before that, India was the world-leader when it came to companies setting up Engineering R&D (E-R&D) centres here.
513	And though it cost $4.99, it was a sweet ending.
514	And to be honest, we might just give this a go for ourselves.
515	And Tories (or Tory Brexit Party coalition) winning the election.
516	And transportation officials had earlier rescinded a requirement for more advanced electronic brakes for trains hauling crude and other hazardous fuels.
517	And United hope the eye-watering fee will see them secure Koulibaly's signature in a stunning swoop.
518	And we also focus on great sound.
519	"And we need many more todays."
520	And what better place to start rebuilding a roster than with the most important position on the field?
521	And what does the report say about Modi’s ministers?
522	“And what I found, a lot of women don’t necessarily care about that, they’re not trying to become the next world champion.
523	And what’s going to happen to the family’s lovely bolthole in Cornwall when Labour impose their second-home levy?
524	And when he was 8 months old, in the middle of the night, he had a seizure," said Heather Straughter.
525	And while 67% of Democrats say that the country has not gone far enough when it comes to giving black people equal rights with whites, just 15% of Republicans say the same.
526	And while protesters dismantled part of a police barricade, one reportedly waved what was described as a Chinese flag at cops.
527	And who could blame them?
528	And why have you, an amnesiac detective with a drinking problem, been sent to investigate the murder?
529	And with the Christmas Day games upon us, now seemed like a perfect time to take a temperature check on the NBA's MVP race.
530	And with the rise of and fans having the ability to pull up pretty much any play on the internet, the OG version of might not be as necessary as it was in the early 2000s.
531	And with two-time NBA Finals MVP Kawhi Leonard sitting out again, George took charge of his new team and didn’t disappoint.
532	And working with the chairmen of city council committees, we have ended the practice of certain committees exceeding their budgets by hundreds of thousands of dollars as a matter of routine.
533	And yet it still seemed hard to imagine that deep into a national opioid crisis that claimed more than 47,000 lives in a single year, it was possible to get this much of a dangerous controlled substance you felt fairly certain you could live without.
534	Andy Murray has announced his retirement from tennis.
535	Andy Page, chief meteorologist at the Met Office, yesterday predicted that the impact of the storm on the UK would be 'minimal'.
536	Andy Patel, who works at a liquor store about three blocks away from the site of the shooting told AP there had been consistent gunfire fire about an hour Tuesday afternoon.
537	An EMI like formulae should be considered to compute the income component of each payout,’’ said Manickam.
538	An entire crew of workmen were occupied at what Captain Richardson called the Albion Rancho.
539	An estimated 200,000 migrant workers from Cambodia, Myanmar and Laos are prone to such exploitation by the $6.5 billion Thai fishing industry, according to the Raks Thai Foundation.
540	An even bigger roar followed.
541	A New Jersey police officer who was among a total of six people killed in the that brought the city to a standstill.
542	A new renewable-energy project that RCEA is considering is an off-shore wind farm in Humboldt Bay.
543	A new sensation to be sure.
544	A New Shop Charges for a Selfie ‘Experience.’
545	Angry Knicks fans should also consider that it has never been established that the Knicks weren’t going to trade Porzingis anyway.
546	An Illinois House committee will hold a hearing on Wednesday to discuss legislation that would gradually increase the state’s minimum wage to $15 an hour by 2025.
547	An image on FoxInsiders.
548	An increase of 4,172% from the average session volume of 13,216 shares.
549	An increase of 55% from the average session volume of 1,054,280 shares.
550	An Indonesian, Siti Aisyah, 25, is arrested the following day.
551	An inmate has been charged at a Dubai court with physically assaulting an on-duty police officer and rubbing pepper in his eyes to stop him from returning him to his cell.
552	An interesting twist was Biggie stepping down from scoring the Housemates and giving them the chance to score each other.
553	Ankara threatened to Manbij next and fight the U.S.-backed SDF.
554	An MP is only an ambassador between the government of Goa and the government of India.
555	Annabelle Comes Home will be the one to beat with this weekend's newcomers.
556	Anne-Marie cooked the meals herself and, in truffle season, she always served scrambled eggs with truffles.
557	Annual prostate cancer death is 75% in Ghana based on Ghana Health Service 2015 data(
558	An ongoing feud between neighbours resulted in an argument on Aug. 13 about 7 a.m., at Byera, between Gerald’s daughter, Shevelie Neptune, and Roberts.
559	An only child (Brittany Snow) connects with the half sisters (Megalyn Echikunwoke, Emily Osment) her fertility specialist father (Timothy Hutton) created using his own genetic material in “Almost Family” (9 p.m. Oct. 2, Fox).
560	An open letter signed by Guillermo del Toro, Francis Ford Coppola and Spike Lee, among others, expressed consternation: “It is unacceptable that there is still someone that thinks they can impose their view through the use of violence.”
561	An Organisation of Economic Co-operation & Development (OECD) survey shows that income inequality in OECD countries has increased over the last half century.
562	Another adjunct to the fifth centennial celebration is that the Venice museum system has devised a tool which strollers through the city may consult on their mobiles.
563	Another benefit of sous vide is flexibility.
564	Another Canberra visitor finished hard under a big weight in a BM55 at home and the second horse has since won.
565	Another commented: "I love you so much but I think you need to re-evaluate your stance on the scooter situation.
566	Another commenter said: "The local area is losing its green space and removing this would be a travesty to this area.
567	Another Democratic White House hopeful, New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio, targeted those in Congress who slowed the renewal of the 9/11 Victims Compensation Fund.
568	Another Dolphins A team, comprising André and Jurie Badenhorst, Naan Jiao and Ryan Steyn, broke the Boys 8 and Under 200m Freestyle Relay record in a time of 2:47.06.
569	Another incident, in Year 9, resulted in Shepherd being disciplined for refusing to sign exam papers with his real name.
570	Another interesting bit is that Wagner claims this was in Gotham Prison, but the end of said that Luthor was imprisoned in Arkham Asylum.
571	Another major challenge was that, while the audience can see the vivid projections, the actors backstage cannot.
572	Another of those assists came a few possessions later on a beautiful dish to Hamm, who finished with another dunk to knot the action at 25-25.
573	Another person told how they'd incorporated a modern style into the space to make the most of the church's original stunning stained glass windows.
574	Another step in that direction.
575	Another Talmud Torah official told Ynet that more mature children of Ethiopian origin are accepted to the ultra-Orthodox schools, but when it comes to kindergarten, things are different.
576	Another tunnel, this one connecting the Kinder Building and the Glassell School of Art, will be illuminated with yellow lights.
577	Another Twitter user similarly remarked, "You've made Trump a supervillain and depicted him in the scene where his plan to kill everyone in the universe falls apart due to his arrogance and incompetence."
578	Another user wrote: 'This is a masterpiece of editing.'
579	Another year passes, and Danny is having another birthday barbecue.
580	A notification to this effect was issued by the High Court from the administrative side, which said special judge Sharma, who is conducting trial of the cases, shall record her testimony.
581	A NOTORIOUS burglar was finally nabbed last week after having broken into Pinocchio Primary School.
582	An overhead view of Tarasenko just after releasing the shot shows just how much room the forward had to operate.
583	Anthony Sanchez, 2, is fascinated by the chile roaster at Chile Traditions on Thursday afternoon.
584	Ant McPartlin 'returns to work on I'm A Celeb with Declan Donnelly'
585	A number of 2020 candidates have unveiled policies and platforms dedicated to protecting LGBTQ+ rights.
586	A number of equities research analysts have recently weighed in on ICE shares.
587	A number of municipal governments issued evacuation advisories to areas particularly at risk, including some in the most populous greater Tokyo region, according to public broadcaster NHK.
588	A number of other units from Fort Campbell also took part in the exercise, including teams from the 101st Sustainment Brigade, 406th Army Field Support Battalion and 101st Airborne Division (Air Assault).
589	A number of safety tips pamphlets were handed out during the campaign.
590	An unidentified adult male also allegedly involved in the incident was being sought by law enforcement.
591	An unknown opponent will make the trip to Raider Field outside of Haviland on Friday when Dayton Jefferson travels to Paulding County.
592	An unnamed Democratic operative said to have knowledge of the plan struck a similar tone when he helpfully pointed out that all that cash would be “enough to buy up all the TV ad inventory in the seven or eight states that really matter in a primary.”
593	An unsportsmanlike conduct penalty on the Cardinals put them at their 30 with 6:43 left.
594	Anurag Kashyap’s Sacred Games 2 will begin streaming from August 15 on Netflix.
595	Any examinee caught with any document which can be an aide in the exam will have to face consequences.
596	Anyhow, whatever happens with a standalone movie at least we can all rest assure that Brolin will not be out of work for the time being.
597	Any new VW Golf sold from 2020 that has Car2X technology can exchange road data with other compatible models that are within 800 metres, irrespective of make and model.
598	Anyone can make a donation to the cause by calling (205) 224-5003.
599	Anyone who has experienced the actual Palace knows that while the huge, elaborately decorated rooms are stunning in person, tourists aren’t able to peek around cabinets or see the views from the beds of the King and Queen.
600	Anyone who has seen Denise Miller-Langley, or knows of her whereabouts is asked to call Missing Persons detectives at 443-984-7385 or dial 911.
601	Anyone who has watched McDonagh Cup hurling over past two years will know the standard is high.
602	Anyone who is struggling with addiction can call Banyan Treatment Center for a free assessment at 888-493-4429, or Wollet’s personal cell phone number at 330-261-2163.
603	Anyone who knows a subject or activity in depth or intimately also knows that popular depictions of those subjects or activities rarely get everything right.
604	“Anyone who knows me knows I ride my bike everywhere.
605	Anyone with information is encouraged to contact police.
606	“Any physical harm the individual and/or their family suffers as a result of disclosure means that the individuals and publications reporting such names will be personally liable for that harm,” they wrote.
607	Any short ball will be attacked.
608	"Anytime you can get new business is great," said Rock Island Mayor Mike Thoms.
609	Anyway, if you’d like to grab yourself a pair of Airpods, you can grab them from Best Buy (US and Canada) here, or if you’re in the UK, you can pick them up from Currys.
610	A one-bedroom, two-bath apartment with an open mezzanine level, an enormous walk-in closet built out with a California Closet system, four other closets, maple flooring, a washer and dryer and private roof deck.
611	AP also asked for how many cases resulted in no conviction or are still pending.
612	Apart from online and offline recording, there will also be video recording of the poll proceedings in 200 other polling booths, he said.
613	Apart from what has been posted there is no fresh news.
614	A passenger recorded the chaos in the cabin upon landing.
615	A peak wind gust of 96 mph was recorded at Pine Flat in the Mayacamas Mountains about 12 miles northeast of Healdsburg.
616	A Pennsylvania appeals court has thrown out rapper Meek Mill’s decade-old conviction in a drug and gun case.
617	A POLICE officer from Bulawayo was allegedly caught red-handed, naked, wearing a condom and trying to rape a 54-year-old teacher after failing to locate his girlfriend whom he had come to visit.
618	A police spokeswoman said: “There were three vehicles involved, a Citroen Berlingo, Renault Scenic and BMW Coupe.
619	A post displayed on influencer marketing app Tribe sought recruits to "get across the great atmosphere" of Champions League games.
620	Appearing on today’s episode of ITV daytime talk show This Morning, the singer confirmed the news to hosts Phillip Schofield and Holly Willoughby, revealed that come the big day he even plans to cook a lovely Christmas dinner for the whole family.
621	Apple bought the show in a bidding war and ordered up two seasons.
622	“Apple has huge market share and is a huge leader,” Oppenheim said.
623	Apple MacBook Air 13.3-inch save $350, now $649.99 (was $999): The MacBook Air with a 13.3-inch display, 1.8 GHz 8th Gen Intel Core i5 Dual-Core processor, 8GB of RAM and 128GB SSD.
624	Apple TV+ show 'Truth Be Told' launches with Hollywood premiereThe new drama series was unveiled at a screening in Hollywood, with stars including Octavia Spencer and executive producer Reese Witherspoon, ahead of its Apple.
625	Apple wants to use its Apple Watch to help you track your sleep quality and hopefully improve it.
626	Applications and program details are available at the JDA office, 125 Central Ave. in Killdeer.
627	Applications listing LINK card number cannot be used for free or reduced-price meals.
628	Appropriate criminal law is up to our elected officials.
629	Approximately 2,484,692 shares traded hands during mid-day trading, an increase of 73% from the average daily volume of 1,439,860 shares.
630	AP reporter Diane Jeantet contributed to this report from Rio de Janeiro.
631	April 22 was Earth Day – upcycling is fun people and every bit helps.
632	April 3, 2019 at 7:14 AMReminder that most often this is how we get regulations.
633	April 9 – Nikolaj Coster-Waldau on “The Ellen DeGeneres Show”
634	• A proposed increase in the LEAC on July 1, 2019 of approximately 4 cents/kWh.
635	Apurva Asrani retweeted Krish's interview with Faridoon Shahryar and addressed the director.
636	A quiet end to this stormy story where we can recompose our thoughts,” said Clifford Ross.
637	A rally earlier this month in London by people who want Britain to remain in the European Union.
638	A ram raider has admitted driving at police after using a stolen car to smash through doors at an Aberdeen firm before stealing a safe.
639	A range of consumer goods were also on display, including mid-range wristwatches, kitchen and household appliances, baby strollers, eyeglasses, toys, and sports equipment.
640	Arbubakrr’s husband, former NFL football player Hassan Arbubakrr, who is also the father of NBA star Hassan Whiteside of the Miami Heat, said he doesn’t mind the attention on Father’s Day or any other day of the year.
641	Arcega-Whiteside checks all the boxes when it comes to football intelligence.
642	‘Archer didn’t bowl well,’ said Vaughan at the close.
643	Archie Brooks, Leonard Kempinski, Mark Hughes and Elizabeth Pollard were all killed, with Leonard dying on impact from the crash and Mark caught in an explosion at Whiteley’s Farm.
644	Architects and lawyers for Starbucks presented to Town of Brookhaven Aug. 8 the intent to turn the KFC located at the corner of Route 25A and Hallock Landing Road, into a Starbucks.
645	Archwood Exchange is presenting a marketplace featuring black-owned businesses from noon to 5 p.m. on Friday, November 29. Check it out at the Parsons Center for Health and Wellness, where you can also enjoy local entertainment and family activities.
646	Ardern began her first address to Parliament since the attack with the Islamic greeting, “as-salaam alaikum.”
647	A rejected Iraqi asylum seeker in has been sentenced to life in prison for the rape and murder of a 14-year-old girl.
648	A rendering of the 17-story, mixed-use residential development to be constructed at the former site of the landmark RKO Keith’s Theater in Flushing.
649	A report from the Inspector General at the Department of Homeland Security was published yesterday.
650	A report this week found that UK criminals make more money selling drugs online than anywhere else in Europe.
651	"Are there black movies for kids of color where it is not about gang violence, it is not about drugs, where it is not about that?
652	Are tigers, elephants and leopards killing one another in Corbett?
653	Are you a Purim scrooge?
654	Are you excited for their new collaboration (if it exists)?
655	Are you extra fired up for Saturday’s showdown with the Aggies?
656	Are you facing an important decision today?
657	Are you from El Paso?
658	Arguably one of the hardest in earth’s history.
659	Arif had directed Waseem to flee to Saudi Arabia after the murder.
660	Arizona running back Gary Brightwell, right, scores a touchdown against UCLA in the second half during an NCAA college football game, Saturday, Sept. 28, 2019, in Tucson, Ariz. Arizona defeated UCLA 20-17.
661	Arizona wines, like the wines of any place, vary between growing regions and vineyards.
662	Armed groups promise to end “all hostilities and forms of violence” against, among others, aid workers and civilians and eventually to dissolve.
663	Around this will be 19 serving stations — each staffed by a page, footman, under butler and wine butler — who will use a traffic light system to coordinate courses.
664	Arrangements were entrusted to the care of the Payne Funeral Chapel in Memphis.
665	Arsenal’s big chance to try and end a miserable run without a win away to top six opposition now stretching back 23 games came when Pepe skilfully dribbled past Andy Robertson to burst clear on goal, but his shot was weak and easily saved by Adrian.
666	“Art helps create a healing atmosphere.
667	Arthur and Perry, a boring-but-loving business consultant couple, are the most stable set of lovers among Gregory’s friends in this film adaptation of Terrence McNally’s 1994 play.
668	Artwork Copyright Tyler SpanglerBuy prints here: society6.
669	ARX Maritime, a global agency tracking maritime developments in the region, had reported the kidnapping of 18 Indians by pirates near the Nigerian coast on Wednesday.
670	Aryacoin (AYA) traded 0.6% higher against the dollar and now trades at $0.0052 or 0.00000051 BTC.
671	As 2019 Big Brother Naija reality show finally comes to an end, finalists in the house are already nervous over who wins the mega N60 million after 99 days.
672	As a Boy Scout, Bishop DiMarzio earned the title of “,” the organization’s second-highest honor after Eagle Scout.
673	As a group, analysts anticipate that LyondellBasell Industries NV will post 10.27 earnings per share for the current fiscal year.
674	As a group, analysts predict that Old Line Bancshares, Inc. will post 2.2 EPS for the current fiscal year.
675	As a group, equities research analysts predict that NVIDIA Co. will post 4.08 EPS for the current year.
676	As an Airbus guy, my concern is that a specific issue turns into a generic problem.
677	As an example to others.
678	A Santa Clara Valley Medical Center spokesperson said conditions of those admitted to medical facilities ranged from fair to serious.
679	As a parent I am learning from my girls about this.
680	As a precaution, we have decided not to risk it.
681	As a result of exposing these prison conditions, his wife is not allowed to visit him again until 22 April 2019.
682	As a result, the case was moved from traffic court to Superior Court.
683	As a result, the farmer with 1,000 birds will experience greater efficiency than the farmer with 30 birds, as the remaining doses will go to waste.
684	As at now, the compensation for the stretch of 4.3kms has been paid.
685	As a trained violinist and pianist, she taught lessons before she started suffering from serious health challenges.
686	As awkward as it may sound, the height of women’s high heels reflects the economic atmosphere.
687	As a young child, it was where she saw her first production, although admits she was too young to remember what it was.
688	Asbill seeded pasture borders with sunflowers and other plants that attract pollinators.
689	As Burgess left the courtroom Wednesday night, he had a message for his family.
690	As Burnley know only too well from this time last year, attempting to qualify for the Europa League can have an enormous impact on your domestic form.
691	“As college students we spend so much money on our education and other outside expenses that we really need to keep our budget tight, especially with food,” Daruwalla said.
692	A screenshot showing Hino Electric's 1-cent per kWh offer on PowerToChoose.org. The false rates rose to the top of search results on PowerToChoose until the PUC tweaked the site.
693	As Dr Patrick Nolan, one of the report’s authors, said: "The economy is like a car stuck in first gear, where faster growth comes from revving the engine rather than driving more efficiently.
694	A senior National Aviator’s Guild member told IANS in Mumbai: “If such an assurance is given, then the committee (guild) will ask pilots to take a call — it will depend on what the majority wants.”
695	A separate source from the provincial government also confirmed the toll.
696	As ever, we'll round up the best UK deals for you right here including offerings from all the major retailers including Amazon UK, Currys PC World, John Lewis, AO and Argos.
697	“As far as I am concerned, social media only portrays one side of the story and not the reality of life itself and that is why I fear it so much.
698	As Fleischer quotes me—accurately—I wrote that the book says Brill was reported to have interviewed Sheeran.
699	As for Bliss and her current career, she’s one half of the Women’s Tag Team Champions along with Nikki Cross.
700	“As for importing, that’s a big question on everyone’s mind.
701	As for JBG Smith, Courtien said the idea of a PLA was more of a “mind bend” to them, but he fully expects the development firm to follow Amazon’s lead, given the size of the company’s investment in the area.
702	As for tariffs, Trump thinks they’re an effective leveraging tool in any deal.
703	As for teens, not so much.
704	As for the adult program, Chapman says he's finally relenting.
705	As for the screw-tailed dogs themselves, the researchers say there’s still a lot to uncover about them.
706	As Francis prepares to become the first pontiff to visit the country since St. John Paul II in 1981, it’s timely to take a look back at the religion’s tumultuous history in Japan.
707	As Grace can't always be bothered to remember her kids' names, sometimes Brianna is simply referred to as "the mean one".
708	As he grew older, he wanted to steer Atlas into a force that would aid humanity.
709	"As Henri Cartier-Bresson once said; 'Your first 10,000 photographs are your worst.'
710	Asian shares rallied Thursday after the S&P 500 and Nasdaq closed at record highs, though South Korea's Kospi declined after North Korea launched two short range missiles into the sea.
711	Aside from booking as early as possible (rooms sell out quickly!
712	Aside from reading the actual legislation, a decent summary can be found in the DNR annual Hunting Digest and on the DNR Private Forest Lands website.
713	Aside from registering their off-road vehicles, residents were able to get free doughnuts, shirts and more at the event.
714	Aside from senior forward Jared Wilson-Frame’s 59 3-point makes, no other Pitt player has made more than 30. With Wilson-Frame gone to graduation next season, Drumgoole should slot in to replace his scoring production at the forward spot.
715	As I drove home, I thought about the future of the Sea Islands, and my own role in that future.
716	As if bastardizing mashed potatoes weren’t enough, now they’re trying to take down pizza crusts.
717	As if it were that simple.
718	As I looked at the man in Seat 2B, I wondered if my historical positioning was turning his humanity into evidence of white male dominance.
719	A similar number is expected next year.”
720	As I said at the time, standing up for the economic well-being of our constituents is not a Democrat or Republican issue, it’s what we’re supposed to do as elected officials.
721	As I said before, I root for Daga to do well.
722	As I said I did not understand,.
723	As it has already done for so many who have seen ‘The Look’, we hope this film leads to constructive conversation, understanding and positive action,” Pritchard added.
724	As it was a city official and later his wife came out and inspected the digging and with conflicting admonitions.
725	As Joe Ott — a Huntington Beach resident these competitions for the past five years — held and looked over the various entries, he said Woodward’s tomato remained the clear best choice.
726	Asked about President Trump’s decision to let Turkey seize northern Syria, the Democrats unleashed a predictable flood of condemnation: “outrageous,” “shameful,” “a betrayal of American values.”
727	Asked about the possibility that his right-hand man could leave, Guardiola said: “I’d like him to stay with us as much as possible.
728	Asked about whether military action was possible, he insisted that he did not want to go to war but added: “I don’t want war with anybody.
729	Asked what she would tell children growing up in the world today, Swift admitted it's harder now than it was when she was a child.
730	Ask your boss to back you up and provide confirmation if and when you say “no” to a task.
731	"Ask yourself how you plan to use the card and what you want to get from it," Schulz said.
732	As leader of Himilo Qaran party, he was recently chosen the presumptive head of the Forum for National Parties (FNP), a loose coalition of six outfits opposed to Farmajo's administration.
733	As long as the certificate says you are sick, you are presumed to be sick, at least for official purposes.
734	As many as 50 houses in Shibalaya upazila, and over 200 houses, including a mosque, a madrasa and a school in four unions of Daultpur upazila have already been devoured by the river.
735	As medical professionals did their work, a group of students from Saltillo High School were watching and learning.
736	As mentioned, opposing Brexit, supporting HS2, supporting a massive infrastructure investment and opposing immigration restrictions that the Tories wanted to put in place are all policies which ourselves and business are already aligned on.
737	As much as possible, your resume should just pay attention to details that are regarding.
738	As Mulvaney and his White House colleagues have deliberated the best counter-impeachment strategy for Trump to follow, the president has pursued a go-it-alone approach that raises questions about the futility of their efforts.
739	As neither the right nor left have a clear majority to form a governing coalition, Netanyahu called on Benny Gantz to meet with him Thursday and form a broad unity government.
740	As of 10:30 a.m., the storm had dumped 3.1 inches at O’Hare and 2.9 inches at Midway, according to the National Weather Service.
741	As one of the students who drafted and proposed the motion, I received personal threats from SAIA’s supporters.
742	“As optimistic as we are with what Dr. Shin and Dr. Attrache did with him, we won’t know that they were right and they have the answer until later.”
743	A source also tells us the party in ultra-marginal Newcastle-under- Lyme (Staffordshire) seat (majority 30) struggled to get a leaflet out as the first batch misspelt the candidate’s name.
744	A Soyuz-2.1a rocket rolls out to Launch Pad No. 31 on Monday at the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan.
745	As park users, after much discussion and communication today, we are now firmly of the belief that we are on our own when it comes to security solutions,” the group stated.
746	As part of a Mandela Day event, the South African Medical and Education (SAME) Foundation and other like-minded organisations visited the Blair Atholl Primary Farm School and gave the buildings a new coat of paint.
747	As part of a recently-announced Australian tour, the likes of Tex Perkins, Kim Salmon, Tony Pola, Boris Sujdovic and Charlie Owen will join forces to bring their iconic Australian rock and roll sound.
748	As part of the deal, Grasim would take over the assets and identified liabilities associated with the business.
749	As part of the deal surrounding the dissolution of this partnership was that Bungie would agree to develop one more installment in the franchise, which eventually became Halo: Reach.
750	As part of their usual annual budget season practices, the board hosted an evening meeting to go into more detail on the proposed 2020 budget.
751	As part of the questionable Russia collusion probe, former Obama-era national security adviser Susan Rice reportedly unmasked senior members of Trump’s presidential campaign.
752	As part of the REDCycle program, customers dropped off plastic into red bins at supermarkets.
753	As people in the ward around her tried to console her, someone said, “He is her only son”.
754	"As people prepare to protest for their socio-economic rights over the next few days, authorities must exercise restraint against protesters and respect, protect and promote both freedom of expression and freedom of peaceful assembly of everyone.
755	A spokesman added: "We’re looking to crown the next Bake Off champion for the eleventh series of The Great British Bake Off.
756	A spokesman for Home Affairs said the Australian government would always retain "responsibility and accountability" for visa decision making and security checks.
757	A spokesman for the Monmouth County Prosecutor's Office on Wednesday said the child's body has not been located.
758	A spokesperson for Russian President Vladimir Putin issued a statement in regard to the release of the long-awaited report from Special Counsel Robert Mueller about whether Russia colluded with President Donald Trump during the 2016 election.
759	A spokesperson for the army said it was fully committed to improving its recruitment process and was working with Capita to address remaining challenges.
760	As president, he would give $1,000 a month – $12,000 a year – to every American adult, rich or poor.
761	'As preterm children tend to be more timid and shy, supporting them making friends and be integrated in their peer group will help them to find romantic partners, have sexual relationships and to become parents.
762	As Pride Media started the process of taking over the editorial operation from the outside agency, it hired Mr. Picardi as the new top editor, along with new staff members who would replace longtime contractors.
763	As Rapoport pointed out below, the Bears sound like they’re really following any with Hunt.
764	As scandals engulfed the White House, a recent Enquirer cover blared: “Donald & Melania Fight Back!
765	Assemblywoman Lorena Gonzalez, D-San Diego, speaks at rally calling for passage of her measure to limit when companies can label workers as independent contractors.
766	Associated Press writers Aron Heller and Isabel DeBre in Jerusalem, Vanessa Gera in Warsaw and Karel Janicek in Prague contributed to this report.
767	As soon as she presented me with my new toy, I immediately went berserk and demanded that my dad sleep on the couch to protect my gifts from my new green foe.
768	As soon as they leave, the new president would inspect the parade and then read his inaugural address.
769	As soon as you need to break your journey up and plug in, you’re then at the mercy of charging speed instead.
770	As staff writer Pat Kernan put it, you probably noticed some construction on the Sans Souci Parkway in the past week or so.
771	As stated, we have high expectations of professionalism for all officers at all times.
772	“As such, the upcoming fourth season will be our last.”
773	A statement by the governor’s Special Adviser on Communication and Strategy, Mr Bolaji Tunji, on Saturday, called for sober reflection among the players in the election process on how to ensure the sanctity of the electoral process.
774	‘As terrible as this situation is, I can’t stop reading the first conversation about the blender at the top.’
775	As The Daily Signal reports, “The College Affordability Act would cap monthly payments and enable students to enroll in an income-based repayment plan.
776	As the FTC points out, rather than erring on the side of privacy, TikTok accounts are automatically set to public.
777	As the global population grows grayer, this issue is only expected to increase.
778	As the pounding of the balls echoed, the celebration continued with a free clinic, young people learning skills for life both on and off the court.
779	As the public becomes more aware of the child abuse taking place on U.S. soil, outrage is beginning to make an impact.
780	As the search warrants were being approved, a small group of protesters clashed with police overnight, and a tear gas canister set a car on fire in the old colonial section of Puerto Rico’s capital where the governor’s mansion is situated.
781	As the Town of Coaldale supplies the water to that area, she said it was negligence on their part that allowed the west nile incident and the bird deaths to happen last summer.
782	As they continued to probe the cause of the deaths, police discovered that some victims had been Indonesian workers on a ship that had crashed into a huge wave and sunk.
783	As they signed up, most of the candidates got a pep talk from Secretary of State Bill Gardner, who reminded them that the primary was created to give the “little guy” a greater voice in politics and has, over the years, been won by underdogs.
784	Astonishingly, in 2016 the Employee Benefits Research Institute Retirement Confidence Survey indicated 42 percent of American workers surveyed had saved less than $10,000 toward retirement.
785	A straw with conventional semen carries about 20 million sperm—that includes Y-chromosome sperm, dead sperm, and sperm with defects (think two tails instead of one).
786	Astronomers say potential life on planets around flaring stars might find a creative way to survive.
787	As Warren and Sanders have stepped up their attacks, a host of plutocrats have gone public with their anger at all this billionaire-bashing, and some are already coming out for Bloomberg.
788	As we can see, Brody Jenner and Kaitlynn Carter have definitely moved on with their own lives.
789	As we have alluded to in a previous column, secondhand smoke is even more dangerous.
790	As well as showing their anguish at Gomes' injury, players from both sides consoled Son And Aurier for their roles in the incident.
791	“As we read the poems that were submitted and chosen, we kept thinking of what was missing,” she said.
792	As with any production, the director’s task is to tell the story as she sees fit.
793	As you might expect, running back usage increases and Spratt notes, “running backs see a bigger bump in their yards per carry average in clear, cold days than they do in snow games.
794	At 14, this grandson was directing and editing skateboard videos and laying down background tracks.
795	At a later date, her family will have a small private gathering to spread her ashes.
796	Atara Biotherapeutics stock traded down $0.42 during mid-day trading on Friday, reaching $15.16.
797	At a time of heightened concern about wildfires and other potentially catastrophic events, the UC Berkeley community is eager and willing to prepare for potential emergencies and disasters.
798	At current rates emissions will stand at about 160 million tonnes in that year.
799	'At first we thought 'are you serious?' but we loved every minute.
800	At halftime, had only completed 7 of 8 passes for 27 yards, and on their final drive of the second quarter, they had turned it over on downs after two straight runs at the 1-yard line.
801	A thank you for the Cy Young, the perfect game, the nights when Hernandez demonstrated how much he cared about the organization.
802	Athens (1-3) went into the game coming off their first win on Sept. 20 over Alexander, 28-6.
803	ATHENS – Hard Rock International Chairman and Seminole Gaming CEO Jim Allen announced a binding offer for the casino in the Hellinikon Project, at a press conference in Athens on Friday.
804	Athers doesn’t get why Archer didn’t start the day with the ball yesterday, but he also calls out England’s lethargy.
805	A thief stole a $20,000 Salvador Dalí etching from a San Francisco gallery.
806	A thief who stole a vintage bike with huge sentimental value has been urged to return it by the end of the day, “no questions asked”.
807	Atkins quite literally shows us why he thanks God for the days on his front porch swinging, to the nights he spends performing onstage.
808	At Labour’s manifesto launch today, nothing will give me more pleasure than to see it is now official policy in all circumstances.
809	ATLANTA — A discarded security tag has caused a scare in downtown Atlanta.
810	ATLANTA, Ga. (NBC) – Wednesday night, ten…
811	Atlas Capital Advisors LLC increased its position in shares of United Continental by 1.9% during the first quarter.
812	At least 49 worshippers were killed in attacks on the Al Noor Mosque in central Christchurch and the Linwood Mosque in the city’s suburb, seen as one of the worst attacks on Muslims in that country.
813	At least 50 people were killed.
814	At least 84 protesters were killed, most of them in Baghdad, since Tuesday when demonstrators initiated rallies to demand jobs, improvements to services and an end to corruption in the oil-rich nation.
815	At least mr big chest got better at quitting.
816	At least one parent has taken the defense that he he was paying for legitimate college counseling services.
817	At least six workers have given statements to NOS about what happened to them.
818	At least that's what a left-wing producer from NowThis News said in a Monday video during which she explained in great detail — complete with historical background — why saying "guys" is "lazy," "inconsiderate," and "reinforces the gender hierarchy."
819	At least the city of Cleveland was smart enough unlike Houston to demand the franchise name stay in its city for its new team.
820	At least two people, one male and one female, were killed in an attack outside a synagogue in the German town of Halle on Wednesday, Yom Kippur, at 11:20 AM, local police reported.
821	At one of those practices, an older student I admired recounted her college trip to Northwestern University.
822	At one point, Karen Schwartz looked at her watch and said she should be teaching a math class.
823	At OpenAI, researchers have trained a robotic hand to manipulate an alphabet block as a child might.
824	A top member of Russia’s parliament, foreign affairs committee deputy head Dmitry Novikov, on Friday appeared to suggest that was a possibility once the investigation into Whelan was completed.
825	At present, 90 percent of the world's foie gras now comes from geese, rather than ducks, which was previously the preferred bird of choice.
826	“At some point in time everyone seems to be engaged in the hurling club.
827	“Attackers could also compromise vulnerable servers and host malicious code on them and wait for users to connect to them.”
828	Attempts to reach ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe also proved unsuccessful.
829	Attend a journalism lecture at Northwestern in the morning, and then an engineering class at Texas A&M in the afternoon?
830	"At that moment I had a bullet in my heart."
831	At that point a survivor peeked out of the bathroom door, and two officers opened fire when he didn’t show his hands, Barra said.
832	At that time it was an event not set to happen until 2024, giving Barry a chance to figure out how to avoid his fate but now he knows the harsh truth.
833	At the 9:00 A.M. Meeting on November 19, 2019, all bids will be opened and read aloud at the Jackson County Courthouse Annex at 220 Walnut St., Brownstown, IN.
834	At the beginning of her journey, Lucy starts with a few keys but wants to find more.
835	At the conclusion of the legislative session each year, both chambers have quietly passed the drop-dead bill.
836	At the Emirates stadium, Alex Iwobi could make his sixth appearance for Arsenal who face a tricky tie on Thursday evening when they host BATE Borisov in the second leg of the Europa League last-32 clash.
837	“At the end of the day we are still two kids in our twenties that enjoy having a good time.”
838	At the end of their internships, they do a capstone project.
839	At the event, Bobby Flay spoke (via video) about his involvement, saying he was excited to be able to enter “basically any kitchen in the world, anywhere in the world,” to teach people how to cook.
840	At the event, Boris Johnson was invited to physically take the NHS off a table draped in an American flag.
841	At the Independent Pizzeria, we ordered a pie with local morel mushrooms.
842	“At the moment we are ascertaining the number of dead,” said Girdhari Nayak, a senior officer from Chhattisgarh state, where the attack occurred.
843	At the moment, we only know what the US launch date is: November 12.
844	At the other end of the table, Cardiff's surivial hopes have taken a major hit after defeat to Fulham, compounded by Brighton earning a point at home to Newcastle.
845	At the Philippine Internet Crimes Against Child Center, national, British and Australian law enforcers will collaborate to detect cross-border abuse and protect children.
846	At the point when guests explore your site, they only need a few seconds to choose whether or not you’re genuine.
847	At the polling unit in Jonathan Memorial Pry School, Ajilosun Ado-Ekiti, the process is orderly.
848	At the same time, I have been clear about my wholehearted support for whomever is the eventual nominee.
849	At the same time the communication grids vital for everyday work and profit are buzzing with shared knowledge and discontent.
850	At the same time, the show will portray the Long Night in detail when the White Walkers first descended upon Westeros and to excite the narrative further, the show will feature the Andal Invasion when the Andals conquered most of the Westeros.
851	At the time, May was hemmed in by the Democratic Unionists, who exerted a strong influence over the hard-line, pro-Brexit faction of the Conservative Party.
852	At the time, Sgt. Paul Parizek said the body had been “cleverly concealed.”
853	At the time, the Makowskys were optimistic about turning a profit.
854	At the Wellesley Creates finale, four teams were recognized for "best ideation," "best business execution," "best coding" and "best app.”
855	At this point in history, no one is going to stumble into a Bill Burr show.
856	“At Tim Hortons, we believe that we have a responsibility to contribute to a clean environment,” the email said.
857	Attorneys returned polarizing retention scores for Family Court, with judges generally scoring either in the 40s or between 70 and 90 percent.
858	At Urban Growler, the staff enjoy two things during every shift: a beer and a bit of bacon.
859	At various points during the hour meeting that lasted almost two hours, members of the crowd applauded, gave the occasional “amen,” called for all incumbents to be turned out of office, and more than once broke out into uncomfortable, sarcastic laughter.
860	At which point one of the football writers in his company gently pointed out that if he looked out of his window he would see Negri getting out of his car.
861	A two-time winner of the race, Satariano’s latest boat is a step up from previous projects.
862	Audi's A6 sedan enters its sixth-gen with an understated design.
863	Auditor General DePasquale: Who Will Care for Mom & Dad?
864	A uniformed officer saw an allegedly stolen Yamaha motorcycle, believed to have been taken from Ascot Park in the past week, in the car park of a Park Holme shopping centre, on the corner of Marion and Oaklands Rd, just after 11am on Saturday.
865	A U.S. State Department official noted that there had so far been no claim of responsibility, and that no U.S.-inhabited facility was impacted.
866	Australians are now coughing up $13 billion a year on their pets, with about a third going to food, a fifth goes to vet services and 10 per cent to accessories.
867	Australia's Caleb Ewan wins his maiden Tour stage, edging out Dylan Groenewegen in a thrilling bunch sprint finish.
868	“Australia stands out.
869	Australia will finally have a mechanism to appropriately control the return of foreign fighters into the country following the passage of the Temporary Exclusion Order (TEO) legislation through the parliament this afternoon.
870	Authorities also found what they describe as an incendiary device in the U-Haul rental van used by the shooters.
871	Authorities and investors view hydro power as a green alternative to other sources of energy and say it could help the countries hit the renewable energy targets they need to meet to join the European Union.
872	Authorities said in court records the illegal narcotics were exposed from packages creating dangerous conditions.
873	Authorities said they could not allow a protest at State House because it is a protected area.
874	Authors Joanna Trollope and Lee Child – best known for the Jack Reacher thrillers – were both given CBEs.
875	Automakers are investing heavily in hydrogen as well.
876	AVC: How many do you usually get?
877	… avenge two regular season losses to Cincinnati.
878	A version of this article appears in print on of the New York edition with the headline: The Only Way to End ‘Endless War’
879	A very special thanks to Herald journalist and Tweni resident Shona Aylward for cleaning up plant pots at the Abingdon R102 intersection last Sunday.
880	A video taken by a witness outside the store shows the suspect with his arms up in the air and what looks like an assault rifle slung around his neck as he’s being arrested.
881	A vote on passage of the defense bill is expected to take place on Thursday.
882	AVX Co. (NYSE:AVX) has received a consensus broker rating score of 3.00 (Hold) from the one analysts that cover the stock, Zacks Investment Research reports.
883	A whole bunch of deals were cemented right at 4 p.m. ET when the league year started, and that’s the case this year as well.
884	A woman is facing animal cruelty charges after police say officers recently discovered a puppy mill in northeast Edmonton.
885	Axos Financial reported earnings of $0.80 per share in the same quarter last year, which would indicate a positive year-over-year growth rate of 11.3%.
886	Ayade is not a politician because politicians don’t keep to their words.
887	Ayodele noted that never in history had any minister taken the issue of condition of service serious since the inception of NCAA.
888	A YouTuber recently reported that the Call of Duty: Modern Warfare was really bad, although this could change with the final release.
889	Ayupov also shared the city’s plans for using a large LED screen in the open-air movie theatre.
890	Babatunde Olowookere, the programs of OPCW says that, the officers have been equipped with skills in managing toxic chemicals from both terrorism attacks and factories.
891	Baby Marquez Norm and Ollie can’t wait to start their big brother duties.”
892	Bachchan became the family surname.
893	Back both teams to score against a Chelsea team who currently look laboured and disorganised at the back.
894	Back in 2006-07 he has given 5 consecutive hits in 365 days and now from 2016-2017 again in 18 months 20 days another 5 consecutive hits.
895	Back in September, she was arrested following a fight with Swae.
896	Back then they couldn’t agree on what a post-independence political economy should look like.
897	Back to a no burp nowHere’s how i learned to Burp (Ongoing Burp-Log), include temporary tweaks that seem to help.
898	Bacon saved: Vets called Mango, seen here about six weeks and 11 kilograms ago, a 'tough little dude' after he was found injured on Highway 417.
899	Bacon's contorted figures are easily recognisable.
900	Bad faith cases involve allegations that insurers have not properly looked out for the interests of their customers.
901	Bad for my team, but great for ‘Do.”
902	Badu Kobi further stated that he cannot fathom why men of God who are supposed to fight against the devil are rather fighting against themselves.
903	BAGHDAD — The U.S. will hand over to Iraqi authorities nearly 50 Islamic State members who were transferred from Syria in recent days, two Iraqi intelligence officials said Thursday.
904	Baker Hughes A GE currently has an average rating of “Buy” and an average target price of $36.
905	Bale and James combine well down the left flank, before the latter sends a cross deep towards Moore.
906	Balsillie, whose council represents some of Canada's fastest-growing firms, said in today's economy the most-valuable assets are intellectual property and data.
907	Bandstand speakers can barely be heard over the crowd, just witnessed something go down that sent people running — looked like a confrontation pic.
908	Banerjee also said the Centre should have consulted all political parties before coming to a decision to amend constitutional provisions that accorded special status to Jammu and Kashmir.
909	Bangla Tigers, the new franchise team of the Abu Dhabi T10, has put up a formidable squad in its first bid to win the coveted Abu Dhabi T10 league title which takes place at the Zayed Cricket Stadium from November 14 to 24, 2019.
910	Banking heir James Rothchild proposed to hotel heiress Nicky Hilton on a boat on the 28-mile lake in the shadow of the Swiss mountains.
911	Bank of America raised Esperion Therapeutics from an underperform rating to a neutral rating in a report on Monday, May 6th.
912	Bank of America raised Phillips 66 from a “neutral” rating to a “buy” rating and set a $126.00 price target for the company in a research report on Monday, April 29th.
913	Bank of Montreal Can raised its position in shares of The Medicines by 13.3% in the first quarter.
914	Bank of New York Mellon Corp now owns 279,229 shares of the restaurant operator’s stock valued at $4,330,000 after purchasing an additional 14,545 shares during the period.
915	Banks and lending institutions usually come up with several loan offers during the festive times.
916	Banque Pictet & Cie SA now owns 42,296 shares of the company’s stock worth $11,384,000 after buying an additional 18,020 shares in the last quarter.
917	Barari pointed to the other programs of Iran Space Agency (ISA) in the current year (started March 21, 2019) and added, “with the coordination made in this regard, three student cube satellites (CubeSat) will be launched in the current year.”
918	Baresch sent a sample copy of the script to Kircher, asking for clues to reveal what the mysterious manuscript meant.
919	Barnes & Noble, Inc. has a 1-year low of $4.11 and a 1-year high of $7.81.
920	Barrett said Planned Parenthood and abortion clinics represented by the American Civil Liberties Union that sued to stop the law “are certain to succeed on the merits of their claim that (the bill) is unconstitutional on its face.”
921	Barring a few, most mediahouses have bowed down to the BJP-led government,” she added.
922	Based in Sunnyvale, California, the professional social network boasts many of the perks that might be expected of a tech titan.
923	Based on an average daily trading volume, of 124,500 shares, the short-interest ratio is presently 17.2 days.
924	Based on an average daily volume of 590,100 shares, the short-interest ratio is currently 3.9 days.
925	Based on the premiere (the only episode provided to journalists in advance), the show preserves the film’s gleefully over-the-top gross-outs.
926	Based on those assessments and evaluations, a plan is developed that is reviewed annually.
927	Bashi produced the ensemble's debut album.
928	'Basically, I got really sick of the dynamic between he and I'.
929	Bass is not alone in feeling the shortage of holiday spirit for turkey-themed tunes.
930	Baszler continues to counter Li’s strikes.
931	"BBC is completely biased to support the left and will always support the EU," he contends.
932	Bears quarterback Mitch Trubisky has a dislocated left shoulder and a torn labrum, according to ESPN.
933	Beauty products maker Avon will have to face off in court against two former employees who say the company, which bills itself as being “the company for women,” discriminated against them after they became pregnant, it emerged this week.
934	Because Anthony Mackie, Marvel's Falcon (and possibly Captain America), is from New Orleans.
935	Because Beyonce… Overall it was better than I thought it was going to be, but it is its own movie.
936	Because it is,” Stewart, 29, said.
937	Because it’s never been particularly cool to think that music can change the world.
938	Because of the hangar crash, another plane from the fleet was used to take Justin Trudeau to London for the NATO summit last week.
939	Because of the shift in the expecting mother’s centre of gravity, exercises that need balance are to be avoided later in pregnancy.
940	Because only Congress can amend the actual NEPA statute, in June 2018, the CEQ its attempt at the next best thing: It planned to reconsider the regulations that direct federal agencies on how to implement NEPA.
941	Because they are waiting to occupy the printers and photocopiers at the library, students wind up arriving late for classes.
942	Because US munis are exempt from federal, state, and municipal taxes when bought by investors who live in the issuing state or municipality, they are particularly attractive to high-income US households.
943	Because we’re really fighting for the soul of America,” Shelby advised.
944	Beef cattle pictured in Joyceville, Ontario, on Thursday, June 21, 2018.
945	Bees, wasps, scorpions, hornets and spiders can pose a risk, particularly to young children.
946	Before attacking Syria in 2013 after Assad’s use of chemical weapons, Obama asked Congress to pass a resolution authorizing him to take military action because an attack could lead America into another Middle East quagmire.
947	Before being officially announced, the concert was teased by the Live Nation Philadelphia Twitter account, showing the Philadelphia Flyers’ Gritty mascot and the Misfits’ Crimson Ghost skull logo (see below).
948	Before diving into the debut full-length from Motel Radio, all signs indicate that the experience is certain to be a soothing one.
949	Before heading to Connecticut for Passover earlier this year, my partner and I planned to have a talk with their parents about the local Stop & Shop.
950	Before she came back out at 9:51 p.m. Oct. 12, an opportunistic thief had taken the 2019 Lexus ES 350 that had been left idling in the driveway.
951	Before that, he served as Hastings’ AD for five years.
952	Before that, I’d been a ball boy, and had enjoyed that responsibility.
953	Before the hearing started, Tricia Wack, the mother of Stephen Wack, exchanged a few soft words with Sidhu.
954	Before then, he had been a successful hotelier and Republican donor.
955	Before the start of annual screening, about half of the women were sexually active, but there was a decrease in all areas of sexual activity over time.
956	Before Trump was elected, Ryan was critical of Trump’s fitness to be president.
957	Be grateful you still have a job after your performance in week 3 against Mike Evan’s.
958	Behind him were Elijah Hughes and Buddy Boehei…
959	Bei der restlos ausverkauften Auftaktveranstaltung "What the FAQ?
960	BEIJING: China dismissed remarks from George Soros as ‘meaningless’ on Friday, after the billionaire investor called President Xi Jinping the ‘most dangerous opponent’ of free societies and warned against Beijing’s high-tech surveillance regime.
961	Beijing is planning to send another lunar lander, Chang’e-5, later this year to collect samples and bring them back to Earth.
962	Being a guideline, the correspondence needs to be short.
963	BEIRUT — Eight years after the Arab Spring, massive street protests over corruption, sectarianism and official contempt for the citizenry have brought down the Lebanese government of Prime Minister Saad Hariri.
964	Belle is described as 5’6″, 100 lbs, with medium-length brown hair and brown eyes.
965	Bell "started the skating season with a flourish across the ice," said Cherney.
966	Below is what the scam coupon looks like.
967	Belphegor told them they would have to team up to restore the status quo before God declared the end and unleashed all the souls from Hell.
968	Bemis had a net margin of 5.27% and a return on equity of 21.24%.
969	Benitez will be amazed if he does not earn his first England call up later this month.
970	Bennu, the asteroid currently being explored by NASA’s OSIRIS-REx spacecraft, will have its various features named after mythological birds and ‘bird-like creatures,’ according to NASA.
971	“Benny Warr and the community must have justice today, justice tomorrow and justice always,” Stewart said.
972	Benson is even more touched by the way she was named to the order.
973	Be open and honest with your feelings to people you love and trust.
974	Be resourceful and find a friend who has faced a similar situation.
975	Berlin’s Town Council increased the real property tax rate to $.80 per $100 of assessed value for the fiscal year 2020 budget.
976	Besides colors and fonts, another crucial part of any website design is the blank space.
977	Besides her American Music Award nominations, Lizzo recently nabbed six 2020 Grammy Award nominations for categories including Best New Artist, Best Album and Best Song for her hit Truth Hurts.
978	Besides, introducing this idea with only five episodes to go would really over-complicate matters.
979	Besides selling jars of artisanal honey at in Matsuya Ginza (from ¥1,600, before tax), Ginpachi frequently collaborates with other Ginza-based businesses, creating a Tokyo-limited farm-to-table cycle.
980	Besides the fact that straws make up a small minority of ocean pollution, the burden placed on disabled people to not use straws is beyond ridiculous.
981	Besides the US-China trade-related concerns, Home Minister Amit Shah moving a resolution in the Rajya Sabha that all clauses of Article 370 will not be applicable to Jammu and Kashmir kept the pressure on the rupee, the report said citing forex traders.
982	Best of all, the defense denied big plays, forcing the Eagles to live off their jabs, which proved ineffective over time.
983	Best referee of the year went to Gaolatlhe Rampape while Ponatshego Gaseitsiwe was crowned Best Judge of the year.
984	Best Senior Fitness Classes, every weekday morning!
985	Bethel-Thompson has thrown for 300 or more yards in six of his eight starts and hasn’t surrendered an interception in 178 pass attempts.
986	Beto O’Rourke embraces gun licensing plan he once said could go ‘too far’
987	Better to be giving your best at a later time than suffering through the class and risking a failing grade.
988	Betts followed the New York Mets' Robinson Cano, St. Louis' Paul DeJong and Minnesota's Nelson Cruz.
989	Beverly Naya Shines In Action-Packed Trailer For Upcoming Drama, ‘Lockdown’
990	Beyond business needs, the family addresses personal needs with assistants and nannies.
991	Beyond that, James also sent a taco truck on Tuesday to first responders fighting a fire in Los Angeles.
992	“Bicycles are a great and healthy way to enjoy our national parks.
993	BidaskClub lowered shares of CarGurus from a strong-buy rating to a buy rating in a research note on Wednesday, October 3rd.
994	Biden aides have said previously that Biden doesn’t have to win either of the first two states to win the nomination.
995	Bieber, now 25, says it took years to turn his life around, and he attributes that outcome to the "extraordinary people" God blessed him with — including his wife, Hailey Baldwin.
996	BIFFlix Film Series To Screen ‘Force Majeure’
997	Bigg Boss 13: Romance is in the air for Vishal Aditya Singh and Madhurima TuliBigg Boss 13: Ex-couple Vishal Aditya Singh and Madhurima Tuli seem to be coming close in the Bigg Boss house since Vikas Gupta had urged them to clear their.
998	“Big Word of Mouth gives volunteers an opportunity to get up on stage to tell a very Short true story about their life experience.
999	Bihar Floods Update - State witnessed upsurge in dengue cases during current spell of flood and water-logging.
1000	Bikers operate on what the noted scientologist Vanburn Loog called “Reverse Linear Philosophy”.
1001	“Bill Belichick did it again.
1002	Bill C-66, which Ford’s government tabled in December but has not yet passed, would have allowed municipalities to override greenbelt protections and allow development in land that is now protected.
1003	Billy Lee Marlar, age 87, resident of Somerville, Tennessee and husband of the late Midge Jones Marlar, departed this life Thursday afternoon, May 30, 2019 at his residence.
1004	Binance Coin (BNB) traded down 2.5% against the dollar and now trades at $17.90 or 0.00223747 BTC.
1005	Bindi thanks all her supporters, including Jenna Clifford, who introduced Natalie to Dalene and The Teddy Bear Foundation, Hamleys toy store, which is a great supporter of Bindi and the foundation, Gino Mazza.
1006	Binging is like chugging wine—a rush to the desired effect with no focus on savoring.
1007	Bird-repelling reflective tape is the cheapest and easiest way to convince them to buzz off, and you can get a 350 foot roll today for just $11 with promo code KJBIRD.
1008	Birmingham-area companies compete in Chick-fil-A Corporate ChallengeRailroad Park was the site of most of the events.
1009	Birmingham pressed forward and won corner after corner but still could not create a clear chance.
1010	Bishop Mansour heads the Eparchy of St. Maron of Brooklyn.
1011	Bitcoin Diamond (BCD) traded 0.8% lower against the dollar and now trades at $0.79 or 0.00008342 BTC.
1012	Bitether (CURRENCY:BTR) traded 6.9% lower against the U.S. dollar during the 1-day period ending at 14:00 PM E.T. on September 11th.
1013	BitRewards has a market cap of $86,795.00 and approximately $5,928.00 worth of BitRewards was traded on exchanges in the last day.
1014	Bits of twisted metal and rusting debris lie scattered everywhere, buildings and heavy machinery smothered under moss and creeping vine.
1015	BJP Manipur organise rally to thank PM Modi and central leaders amid total shutdown called by AMSU.
1016	BK focuses very heavily on custody, while JPM and C have very diversified operations across many business lines.
1017	Black Friday and its e-commerce-driven sibling, Cyber Monday, have continued to grow and coalesce into each year’s biggest shopping event, a whirlwind of sales that start before Thanksgiving and often run through at least the following Monday.
1018	Black History Month, or National African-American History Month, is an annual celebration of achievements and endeavors by black Americans and a time.
1019	Black Mirror season 5 hits June 5th on Netflix.
1020	Black, plastic sheets cover a banana plantation hit by a disease that ravages the crops on a plantation near Riohacha, Colombia, Thursday, Aug. 22, 2019.
1021	Blackpool are weighing up a move for Blackburn Rovers striker Joe Nuttall as it is likely he will be allowed to leave Ewood Park.
1022	BlackRock Inc. boosted its holdings in Ark Restaurants by 9.0% in the second quarter.
1023	BlackRock Inc. grew its position in shares of Core-Mark by 1.7% in the fourth quarter.
1024	BlackRock Inc. increased its stake in shares of Fidelity National Financial by 3.1% in the 2nd quarter.
1025	BlackRock Inc. now owns 1,512,639 shares of the company’s stock worth $45,001,000 after purchasing an additional 1,474,727 shares in the last quarter.
1026	BlackRock Inc. now owns 1,938,836 shares of the semiconductor company’s stock valued at $85,561,000 after acquiring an additional 394,967 shares during the last quarter.
1027	BlackRock Inc. now owns 4,620,546 shares of the medical equipment provider’s stock valued at $144,623,000 after buying an additional 846,277 shares in the last quarter.
1028	Black state lawmakers are staying away from Trump’s speech, in part over his disparaging comments about minority leaders.
1029	Blakeman: “Head or neck area, yes.”
1030	Blavatnik, who owns Warner Media, attending the 2018 Grammys with his wife, Emily Appelson.
1031	BLENHEIM, SC (WBTW) – A school resource officer with Marlboro County is on administrative leave following an incident involving a male student.
1032	Blind devotion to the state or its leaders would never be enough.
1033	Bluegrass Wise Man ™: Even if you win going away, no race ever plays out how you think it will, and if it does, you'll probably wake up shortly.
1034	BMRCL had converted 22 of 50 trains to six-car trains, while the others still operate with 3 cars each as to how it was previously.
1035	BNP Paribas Arbitrage SA boosted its stake in ICF International by 166.3% in the 1st quarter.
1036	Bobby and Shellie Hale of Decatur announce the birth of a son, Frank Wayne, June 4, 2019, at Wise Health System in Decatur.
1037	Bob Dylan, the Nobel laureate for Literature in 2016, lyricist Paul Anka and great Frank Sinatra have been voracious readers.
1038	Bob is in New Zealand to support a very different initiative, Play It Strange, a charity promoting creativity through songwriting and performance.
1039	Bob Wayne from our staff, who’s a certified crime scene specialist will be taking the point in the police department on that as well,” Glenn said.
1040	Bob Weber is a writer and mechanic who became an ASE-certified Master Automobile Technician in 1976.
1041	Body positivity was the move to encourage women to celebrate their bodies.
1042	Boeing has customers in the region financially impacted by the grounding of the 737 Max, including budget carrier Flydubai, which has more than a dozen of the jets in its fleet and more on order.
1043	Boeing posted its biggest loss in a decade, owing to the grounding of its 737 MAX aircraft, while Caterpillar was challenged by weak China sales in the face of the trade war.
1044	‘Bollywood has power and access to people’s hearts… I don’t like it when they don’t respond to a social tragedy’https://indianexpress.
1045	Bollywoods in at the same time, Truth drops one with a forearm, duck a lariat, right hands, whip across but they manage to run double-teams on him!
1046	“Bolsonaro is relatively fresh in office,” notes Fariborz Zelli, a political science lecturer at Lund University, Sweden.
1047	Bonds violated the terms of his pre-trial release on June 24, 2019, while awaiting his court date for violating probation on a DWI charge.
1048	Booker is the fourth known transgender person in the United States to be killed in 2019.
1049	'Boris connects with voters the Tories do not reach': James.
1050	Boris Johnson, a leadership candidate for Britain’s Conservative Party, gives a television interview before a Hustings event at the Culloden House Hotel in Belfast.
1051	Boris Johnson’s motion to hold an early election has been rejected by MPs, many of whom abstained from voting.
1052	Born in Bombay (Mumbai) in 1932, Apte — a right-handed batsman by trade — started his career as a leg-spinner under the coaching of Vinoo Mankad while he was a student at Elphinstone College.
1053	Born Vivian James in 1939, he moved to England in 1961 and rose to prominence as a literary critic and TV columnist.
1054	Both apps are going live a day before the FIFA 20 EA Access and Origin Access trial begins, which is launching on PS4 and Xbox One.
1055	Both are set to come out in Q4 of 2019, but for now, you can check out the trailers below, and try them out at the Kalypso Media’s booth in Hall 2.1, Booth D-13 of the business area at Gamescom 2019.
1056	Both deflect sceptical questions by comparing the delay and expense in conventional transport infrastructure, not least HS2.
1057	Both draw faculty together in building an integrated curriculum so that students can complete their study over three years.
1058	Both have said that it was 'professionally quite damaging' as it left people to make up their own minds as to why they weren't kept on the project.
1059	Both Johnson and Trump will talk up the possibilities of a US-UK free trade agreement post-Brexit, but the realities of the negotiations are likely to be unsentimental at best.
1060	Both male and female inmates received toiletries, bags of rice, bags of sugar, tins of milo, oil, milk, sanitary pads, washing powders, as well as tooth paste, brushes and other consumables.
1061	Both of those acquisitions also added to the diversity of our client base.
1062	Both Sanford Health and First Premier Bank celebrated the then-new Denny Sanford Premier Center in 2014 with private shows featuring country music acts Keith Urban and The Band Perry.
1063	Both the and Vikings caught wise to this, limiting the Packers’ big plays and holding them to only three second half points through two games.
1064	Both their countries have learned the tragic lesson of how online radicalization can lead to deadly real-world violence.
1065	Both the junior u-15 and men’s teams won their respective leagues in the Mavericks Winter League held recently at the Wanderers Club in Johannesburg.
1066	Both times ended with injuries and neither stint lasted more than three games.
1067	BotRide is a costless and driverless version of Uber where riders are able to hail the vehicle via their phones.
1068	Boyz in tha Hood, BabyBoy everything after that.
1069	“Boyzone, who are another band similar to Westlife, they came back and were better the second time around.”
1070	Brain circuit that controls compulsive drinking of alcohol.
1071	Brandy Melville, Urban Outfitters, random Indian dress and kurti shops.
1072	Brasier was often used to pitch the ninth inning when most of the fans (and big league regulars) had left the park.
1073	Braun homered Thursday at Miami while wearing injured teammate Christian Yelich’s No. 22 jersey underneath his own.
1074	Braves starter Mike Soroka received the other first place vote and finished.
1075	Brazil's Lula da Silva rejects semi-open prison conditionsRogers Media uses cookies for personalization, to customize its online advertisements, and for other purposes.
1076	“Breaks down and they have to replace parts, that’s been a continual problem with these elevators,” said Steve Ukman.
1077	“Breast milk provides adequate nutrients from the first day of birth up to two years,’’ she added.
1078	Breathtaking Ukrainian ladies – what makes they therefore unique?
1079	Brendan Burns: There was a lot.
1080	Brenton Tarrant appeared via video link.
1081	Brian Roberts, left, Carly Blemishes and Deidre Evans light candles during a vigil for Malik Noshi, July 9, 2019, at Arbor View High School in Las Vegas.
1082	Brig. Gen. Romeo Brawner Jr., commander of the Army 103 Infantry Brigade, said three armed men identified as Janla Tangolo, 20, Arapat Tangolo, 22, and Kamarudin Sultan, 20 were arrested in the camp at Barangay Paridi, Piagapo, Lanao del Sur.
1083	Briggs & Stratton’s dividend payout ratio is currently -62.50%.
1084	Bring back the Nehru collar!
1085	Bring the whole family to watch iconic jumps, epic crashes and smashes.
1086	Bring to a simmer over a low heat, and cook until the apples break down.
1087	Brissett’s last showing, which was against the Chiefs in Week 5, was underwhelming, but he has thrown 10 touchdowns to three interceptions in five contests.
1088	Britain and France had been decolonizing its other holdings in the Middle East, too, and the newly independent Arab states of Egypt, Transjordan, Iraq and Syria intervened against Israeli forces, which they viewed as illegitimate.
1089	Britain has called the seizure an act of “state piracy”.
1090	Britain's top diplomat has urged Germany to relax its ban on arms sales to Saudi Arabia because they are affecting U.K. sales of weapons to - and by extension its influence with - the oil-rich kingdom.
1091	British driver crashes £335,000 Aventador moments after.
1092	Britney Spears’ father accused of physical abuse against singer’s son, 13, restraining.
1093	“Britney was having a hard time dealing with her dad’s health issues.
1094	Broker Romain Lecomte of Via Capitale du Mont-Royal, who covers central Montreal districts such as Plateau-Mont-Royal and Rosemont, said the vast majority of the transactions he has worked on of late have involved multiple offers.
1095	Brooking estimates the decade-long program would cost $100 billion.
1096	Brooklyn Lawmakers Hold Speakout on Health Care & Soaring Costs of…
1097	Brothers Mario and Alex took over the shop from their father, Tony Costanza.
1098	Brown’s admission and posting of illegally obtained video and telephone conversations – criminal offenses in California – makes Rosenhaus’ task virtually impossible.
1099	Bruce Pearl going on and on about how often Auburn’s lost to Kentucky and how he’s lost recruits to Calipari.
1100	Brunei woman loses RM153,000 to yet another ‘love scam’
1101	Buddy looked frightened and was dehydrated when found close to the fish market in Sharjah, quite far from home, but is otherwise healthy.
1102	Buga said the Winter Reading Program is sponsored by Northern Lights Library System, who are supplying Acer Iconia tablet as prizes for readers.
1103	Buhari didn’t go to Europe.
1104	Buhari had travelled to Daura on Friday ahead of the Eid-el-Kabir on Sunday.
1105	Buhari said he and his team will roll up their sleeves afresh, and give their best in his second term of office.
1106	Bulawayo Magistrate, Tinashe Tashaya on Tuesday this week acquitted Kambarami and Ward 4 councillor Silas Chigora on charges of assaulting Dube while serving him with his suspension letter.
1107	Bulgaria have been charged by UEFA after their fans racially abused England players during their qualifier on Monday while the Three Lions also face punishment for disrupting the hosts' national anthem and failing to take enough stewards.
1108	Bunker Labs is holding a networking event in Chicago called Bunker Connec.
1109	Burgum said in a statement he "received assurance" from the company that the spill would be cleaned up "as thoroughly and quickly as possible."
1110	Burial will be in St. Michael Cemetery, Terryville.
1111	Burial will be private and at the convenience of the family.
1112	Burke and Mendoza reported from San Francisco.
1113	Burkina Faso, clearly defensive right now, still has two striker up front probing the Ethiopian Defence.
1114	Burton is one of a growing number of "Brexit preppers" stockpiling in anticipation of disruption if Britain leaves the EU next month without a deal.
1115	Bushfires in Australia have spread to the state of Victoria, as firefighters struggle to put out hundreds of existing blazes across several states.
1116	Business First Bancshares has a one year low of $20.64 and a one year high of $27.40.
1117	But a case I’d argued at the Supreme Court was part of a 2010 ruling that banned such sentences for juveniles, making our clients eligible for release.
1118	But according to close friends, these appearances may come to an end if her son has anything to do with it.
1119	But according to the Consumer Affairs Commission, if a gift is not good, the consumer should take it back to the store.
1120	But advocates note that local law enforcement agencies voluntarily submit information about hate crimes to the federal government, and that number is likely significantly under-reported.
1121	But after Mohali’s big boundaries and slow playing surface, the M. Chinnaswamy Stadium will present a contrast.
1122	But Alex, who hails from Wells in Somerset, has since squashed rumours that his spontaneous gig was staged.
1123	But analysts see stocks plunging further, going forward as the economic situation further deteriorates.
1124	But anyway, the positive stuff: For the first time in a long time—especially if rumors of bringing back Greg Schiano are true—there’s hope for the Scarlet Knights faithful for the first time in a very, very, very long time.
1125	But are they socialists?
1126	But as a filmmaker, Young is warm and deeply empathetic, and she is adept at finding wit and humour, at locating the spark of life, in everything she’s so patiently observing.
1127	But as his second term as prime minister became more likely, he made allies of the very politicians he had called targets of the junta's reforms and initiated government handouts that were once scorned as money politics.
1128	But aside from that, reaction to the film has been positive and emotional.
1129	But as it stands today, the biggest threat to the North’s economic prosperity is insecurity.
1130	But, as so often with the Prime Minister, you don’t have to look far to find the flaws in the latest headline-seeking announcements.
1131	But a St. Louis-based Bywater Development Group has purchased the property and plans to rehabilitate the complex and its 90 apartments through affordable housing tax credits.
1132	But a strong script alone isn’t enough to make a good show.
1133	But Atkinson, the government’s intelligence watchdog, mostly discussed process with the committee Thursday, apparently constrained by the law governing his own position.
1134	But before he was known as the “good gray poet,” Walt Whitman cut his teeth as an apprentice at a weekly newspaper, The Long Island Patriot, and he continued to work as a journalist for years after publishing the first edition of “Leaves of Grass.”
1135	But Cochran said those efforts met strong resistance from pharmaceutical lobbyists who didn’t want the drug to be available by prescription only, as it is in Mississippi and Oregon.
1136	But Corbyn also said Labour would oppose any agreement based on the “overwhelmingly rejected” deal that May is trying to resuscitate.
1137	But data has become more distributed.
1138	But detecting it and instituting the necessary governance reforms is well within governments’ power.
1139	But detectives have said her death was not being treated as a hate crime and believe the campaigner was knifed by somebody she knew following a drunken domestic argument.
1140	But does this virtual modeling really replace a personal visit to the site?
1141	But don't expect inflated downstate prices.
1142	But driving major change requires not just forcefulness but also credibility and trust.
1143	But even then, equipping the approximately 13,000 active police officers in the 425 law enforcement agencies across the state wouldn't be easy, experts testified.
1144	But falls are avoidable for most seniors.
1145	But farther up the road, beyond Grand Marais, Judge C.R. Magney State Park (open through Oct. 20) gets my vote for best fall hike.
1146	But finding a time or opportunity to start that routine can be as difficult as sticking to it.
1147	But five minutes later Giacomo Bonaventura blasted in the equaliser to confirm his return from injury with his first goal in over a year.
1148	But for a time limited offer, you can get PureVPN for $2.88 a month on a 2-year plan.
1149	But for now, I gots stuff to do, I'll be chekcing in from time to time.
1150	“But for some reason, the way they deliver it is hilarious.”
1151	But given the recent Sony/Disney deal that shock all the Marvel fans, one cannot be sure as to when this is going to happen.
1152	But Goldsmith noted that Elhady’s claims include allegations that he suffered from hypothermia and agents deliberately reduced the temperature in the cell, and that such circumstances could be considered unconstitutionally cruel treatment.
1153	But happily, it’s easy to replicate at home.
1154	“But he didn’t address any of the underlying issues.”
1155	But he is still none the wiser as to he actually photographed.
1156	But he missed fighting and got back in the cage.
1157	But he must do something to signal that interest rates will no longer be manipulated downward.
1158	But he said the Reserve Bank’s might have kept the repo rate unchanged because it was worried about Moody’s credit rating.
1159	But he says that for migrants who've been in the country for years, it's not easy to leave their jobs and homes in order to seek sanctuary in a church.
1160	But he will come at a price with plenty of baggage and he could not persuade the German giants to make his loan permanent.
1161	But how many players actually walked away from it feeling on top of their game?
1162	But I can’t criticize his effort in the last three games because it’s been there.
1163	But I can’t give you timelines as of now,” Matiza said.
1164	“But I don’t know that I know enough at this point to make any definitive statement.”
1165	But I don’t think that listing the traits your ideal husband will possess means that the universe will plop him in your lap.
1166	But I don’t think the union went about it in the right way.
1167	But, if that makes you feel lazy and unproductive, there are some tricks that can help you exercise.
1168	But if you like fiddle music, you will like us,” Dugal said, adding the duo cover a lot of musical ground, so it will just be the two of them coming to Lethbridge.
1169	But if you never did any of those things, you would never have anything in your life.
1170	But if you’ve ever renovated or built a home, you know the emotional and budgetary stakes.
1171	But I have a mind of my own, and can see and think very clearly.
1172	“But I’m happy I got the call to come to Chicago and I couldn’t be happier to be here.
1173	But in 2014, the Supreme Court ordered Mr. Woyome to pay back the amount, after former Attorney General and now Special Prosecutor, Martin Amidu challenged the legality of the judgment debt paid the businessman.
1174	But, in a nation that takes so many prescription medications, perhaps no one should be surprised.
1175	But in any case, we can only thank the PDP for helping us to prove our case beyond reasonable doubt.
1176	But I need to be able to make a decision because there’s a fine line of that pain or being injured to where it affects how you play or decisions that you make because of being injured.”
1177	But, in fact, the communist revolution was planned and led by a small group of leaders in control of the communist parties, the vanguard of the proletarian revolution.
1178	But in Manchester they made their case for social and economic reform through peaceable political means.
1179	But instead of letting her out at the agreed destination, they made a right at the bakery and headed into Gray’s Farm.
1180	But I refuse - I refuse to let hate and ignorance control my life, you know?
1181	But it cost me £5,000 to fix at that point.
1182	But it depends from person to person, and so you will need to try out you know how quickly it works for you.
1183	But it did not come easy.
1184	But it didn't go far.
1185	But it doesn't quite match the $900 low that Best Buy offered earlier.
1186	But I think the concern is that impeachment might leave him inflamed, or seeking ways to demonstrate he still has power, or looking for distractions.
1187	But I think the number one thing that people are wondering from a kind of policy perspective is about health care cost.
1188	But I think those payments in themselves were dubious, even as the process was manipulated to legitimize the graft.
1189	But I thought Dowdy and Dyson ran the ball well.
1190	But it is unfortunate when your spelling error is carved in stone and set in the centre of a busy pavement for thousands to see each day.
1191	But it’ll be “sunset” for those apartments after the three-year lease is up, Leibow said.
1192	But it's nowhere near the kind of precision we would need to have a full-scale quantum computer."
1193	But it’s possible, I’d argue, to love this play and to understand it deeply without ever fully knowing “what it’s about.”
1194	But it’s still on pharmacy shelves.
1195	But it was all about Brexit, he says.
1196	But just across the border in South Africa, killing captive-bred lions to export their skeletons is perfectly legal — and increasingly lucrative.
1197	But, just like anything else going state-to-state without a federal law to back it up, these are vacillating experiences.
1198	But lucky for me, I have attachment problems and will never catch feelings for a guy who is actually nice to me!
1199	But mango-flavored Juul was the only thing that helped him quit six months ago, he said.
1200	But maybe the best thing about the fair is its overall salute to agriculture, farmers and farm life, which can be really educational to us city dwellers.
1201	But Mill isn’t some random kid who was crushed by a cruel system.
1202	But ministers are unlikely to step in due to worries about the pioneering operator’s longer-term viability, the Times reported on Saturday, leaving it on the brink of collapse and stranding up to 150,000 British holidaymakers abroad.
1203	But Mohamed Salah went back to the top of the standings as his penalty secured Liverpool a 1-0 win at Brighton, with Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang drawing a blank in Arsenal's 1-0 loss at West Ham.
1204	But Mr. Hajaji couldn’t afford any of it because prices were rising too fast.
1205	But my concern is that too much focus has been placed on 2020 with little thought or planning after the games — as shown in the absence of after-event planning for the use of the new National Stadium that has just been completed.
1206	But ninth seed Goerges wasted little time in booking her place in round two, dropping just four games and firing off 26 winners to tee up a clash with Slovenia's Polona Hercog, who beat American Alison Riske 6-4, 6-3 to advance.
1207	But No. 17 looked look he was in his prime again on this one.
1208	But no more, Ms. Gilbert said.
1209	But nowadays I am hardly ever in one.
1210	But now we’re seeing authoritarian regimes expanding around the globe, with media repression in places like Turkey and Venezuela, Cambodia and Vietnam.’
1211	But of course, the younger generations consider Kinnie, Twistees and cheesecakes to be the three main markers of Malta’s culinary identity, Dr Buttigieg admits about today’s reality.
1212	But one of his former colleagues, who asked to remain anonymous, said that writers spent years working 12-hour shifts for paltry sums.
1213	But one of the most standout costumes was easily Emily's Barbarella costume, based on the Jane Fonda film from 1968.
1214	But on tougher issues, from eurozone reform to migration and asylum, from the rule of law and human rights to climate change and industrial strategy, unity was not much in evidence.
1215	But on Wednesday, Thurston said he hasn’t worked out specifics in bringing the state’s diabetics together to make a bulk purchase.
1216	But other dealers do sell cars with safety recalls, according to the new PIRG report.
1217	But our awareness is at last catching up with the planet’s climate catastrophes.
1218	But our potential in terms of human and natural resources is enormous and we need now to harness that potential to make sure that our leadership, which has the task of taking us into the future, does better than those who have made us who we are.
1219	But psychologists say there is no data to suggest that what he is doing is effective in any way.
1220	But pundits knew better: Labour didn’t go far enough to the left.
1221	But "raising ambition" on emissions remains the overarching goal in Madrid.
1222	But real estate deals in Dubai plunged 21.5 percent to $60.7 billion last year, according to government data.
1223	But recently, TPU forum member 'SWZSSR' acquired a Voodoo 5 6000 Revision 3700A and it looks absolutely glorious.
1224	But scientists think the condition is likely a rare case of “parasitic twins,” in which one identical twin is absorbed by the other during early pregnancy, according to Arizona State University.
1225	But Scott said he doesn’t see himself leaving Clemson for another coordinator job.
1226	But she had wrenched herself free from her father’s clutches and had declared, with no hesitation in her voice, that she would marry Romesh.
1227	But she noted the end of a treaty conceived “essentially for Europe” leaves Europe trying to secure future disarmament to protect its own interests.
1228	But since that burst of gigs, Brother Oliver (musical siblings Andrew and Stephen Oliver and drummer Devin Taylor) has been relatively quiet in their hometown.
1229	But since then, the watch has gotten faster to find a signal, so I can begin my workouts faster.
1230	But six Lakers — Davis, James, Howard, Bradley, Danny Green and Rajon Rondo — have all been on All-Defensive teams before.
1231	But so far they haven’t been distracted by it.
1232	But some activists say their concerns about a possible connection arise out of a culture of fear that persists in Ferguson 4 1/2 years after Brown’s death, citing threats — mostly anonymous — that protest leaders continue to receive.
1233	But some residents have accused the Paris authorities of underplaying the risk, saying they were focussed instead on trying to keep the 13th-century monument from collapsing.
1234	Butterfield also questioned the popularity of Teams among users, noting that most the popular Google searches for Microsoft Teams relate to ways to uninstall the application.
1235	But that didn’t stop Drake from persuading it to revive the Channel 4 drama about rival drug dealers in a fictional south London neighbourhood.
1236	But that doesn’t mean a late plate of cheesy pasta will not affect your sleep.
1237	But that fluidity went out of the Diamonds' attack in the final quarter and the Silver Ferns regained the lead with seven minutes to go and never gave it back.
1238	But that gives me another reason to slam him and Koreans.
1239	But that image is so burned in your skull that it's hard to get rid of.
1240	But that is effectively what Jason Kenney and the UCP are trying to do with Bill 22.
1241	But that isn’t all.
1242	But that leaves another issue: Even when it’s fully phased in, Warren’s plan is still pretty unfair to low-wage workers.
1243	But that’s a cop out.
1244	But the artists are the people creating the actual content and touching people’s hearts.”
1245	But, the band still packs that punch with our new lineup, and we’re still looking to further build that sound.
1246	But the biggest difference is the culture and expectations.
1247	But the bitter truth is that developing countries stand to lose the most.
1248	But the business beyond that sort of ramp-up period.
1249	But the city’s large size puts a strain on transportation, which puts a strain on employment — getting to and from work.
1250	But the Commerce Department said on Friday it was still reviewing requests for special licenses for some sales to Huawei.
1251	But the deal was immediately opposed by Icahn and Deason, who at the time owned about 15 percent of Xerox and claimed it severely undervalued the company.
1252	But the décor does not outshine the food which features Executive Chef Jimmy Gallagher’s wide-ranging menu of modern Asian cuisine.
1253	But the jerseys are easier to find than the guitars.
1254	'But the Kia driver didn't react.
1255	But the list of demands expanded as the demonstrations continued for months.
1256	But the most fiery testimonies came from the patient advocates, including one from Vera Sharav, a child survivor of the Holocaust and former librarian who has become a notorious vocal critic of the medical establishment and vaccines.
1257	But, then again, it was even harder when Waititi was pitching Jojo Rabbit to film executives.
1258	But then, Hadi, a former amateur boxer, began vomiting the sea-water that he'd swallowed on the beach.
1259	"But then is it going to be Japan or Scotland to fill one of those other two spots?
1260	But the Norwegian is still hopeful the Red Devils can overturn a 2-0 deficit in Paris.
1261	But then what about the shady links between the Japanese government and Japan Inc which basically drive and define the Japanese society?
1262	But the Ramblers are noticing that the 2019 mix sure has a lot going for it.
1263	But there are many other great causes for the “pro-life” people to get behind – genuinely life-positive ones.
1264	But there is a much stronger consensus on the total.
1265	But there is a strong propaganda being created by the tobacco industry in favour of e-cigarettes with the seemingly harmless name of vaping.
1266	“But there it is: literature moves him.”
1267	But there'll surely be a lot more setup than just the Multiverse - and it could include Norman Osborn as well.
1268	But the replacement fridge couldn't even fit a pint of milk inside - prompting Argos staff to suggest they empty the liquid into smaller containers.
1269	But the research did not reveal much about sexual harassment or sexual assault claims.
1270	But the researchers’ most lasting contribution to public awareness might come from the arthropods themselves.
1271	But the results he did produce showed that the Chicago Police Department’s 3,854 vehicles are not maintained as well as they should be, and the hard-driven vehicles aren’t replaced as often as they should be.
1272	But there was no pause in her words after acknowledging that victory as an amazing highlight before she reflected on her first championship, a cross country race when Nunn-Cearns was just nine years old.
1273	But there was something which was drawing me.
1274	But there were times when things were done which had never been done before, taking amendments to the Queen’s Speech on a European referendum – odd now that he’s such an opponent of it.
1275	But these key qualifiers haven’t stopped the FDA from proposing intimidating warnings for prospective patients.
1276	But the shoot is way off target.
1277	But the slowdown also reflects a steady decline in business investment.
1278	But the story revolving around what happened in that saga doesn't end there.
1279	But the time comes when you have got to weigh up both options and give a pass half a second earlier – to protect yourself rather than running into a huge collision without the chance to brace.
1280	But the two remained close.
1281	But the US Special Envoy Dr. Khalilzad was quoted by domestic and foreign media groups that talks suspended in a bid to go for consultation on issues of councils for embarking on most well awaited Intra-Afghan dialogues.
1282	But the veteran lineman wrote that he had “unfinished business” in his own message earlier in the day.
1283	But they also want to avoid the economic pain that would come to both the U.K. and the bloc from a sudden and disruptive British exit.
1284	But they are also exciting!
1285	But they haven’t received the exposure they deserve.
1286	“But they said the league made a mistake and that was it.
1287	But this isn’t an efficient way and it is going to take a lot of time and money until you complete it.
1288	But this new series is a prequel, taking place long before the time of the film’s heroic pair, Jen and Kira.
1289	But this, too, is a kind of feint.
1290	But this would potentially further bring political uncertainty and even trigger another election.
1291	But to do that we need to find a way of this House agreeing the Withdrawal Agreement and agreeing the way forward.
1292	But true fans will greedily gobble this up and be more than pleased.
1293	But Trump also gave Biden an easy foil.
1294	But unbeknownst to me, my downstairs buzzer was broken, and though the delivery person attempted to call me, my phone was on Do Not Disturb in another room.
1295	“But walking around in Sierra Leone, I realized lighting remains a big problem, so it’s an opportunity as well.”
1296	But Waller-Bridge, who is taking the play into the West End for her final run in the role, had spent years honing her craft.
1297	But we have to start somewhere.
1298	“But we mustn’t let our anger blind us to the fact that we are being called not just to fight for children in the womb, but also for the souls of those who are opposing us.
1299	But, we’re going to give them everything we got.”
1300	But we should embrace those days of inexplicable blues in the same way.
1301	But we’ve learned more about Doug recently.
1302	“But we will do that in line with the American process when it picks up again this fall.”
1303	But what about a splash about?
1304	But what seemed like closed history was reopened once more in 2015, when began a third trilogy in which the old guard of the original “Star Wars” movies fought alongside a new generation of heroes and villains.
1305	“But what you’re not going to see is something that is on every highway, every bridge, every crossing.
1306	But when fires burn uncontrolled and air quality becomes so hazardhous it threatens people's health, governments and others will not accept the overwhelming scientific advice telling us we need to restrict greenhouse gas emissions.
1307	But when May arrived and we still hadn’t seen a trailer, that release date began to look unlikely.
1308	But when she is sent to the principal’s office, Mary is found to have $300 in her purse.
1309	But when she quit Equinox two years ago, she had no idea what she would do next.
1310	“But when something does go wrong, it almost strikes closer to our heart because we don’t expect something to go wrong here.
1311	But when you look at it, there are really sort of four facets to digital transformation.
1312	But while crypto-based UBI might seem implausible, as Altman points out, it could eventually happen.
1313	But while fans might be wondering about the influences of Emperor Palpatine and Supreme Leader Snoke on the latest battle between Light and Dark, the balance of the Force might have been decided long ago.
1314	But while there could still be more added in future DLC, it seems two characters in particular will definitely not be making any sort of appearance, as confirmed by director Ed Boon.
1315	But while Washington think tanks plot the deduction’s demise, the real estate industry is still hoping to restore it in some form.
1316	But why should we trust them?
1317	But Wissanu’s hint that Parina will not be subjected to any criminal punishments riles up government critics, who say the law is not being applied evenly.
1318	But with a firm commitment of gas from a producer, a processor could decide earlier on to build a new facility “and have infrastructure there when the gas starts to come out of the ground,” Helms said.
1319	But with help from British security agents – Mallika Sood (Angira Dhar) and Armaan (Sumeet Thakur), the team soon manages to zero in on Ansari.
1320	“But you do an emergency start in Game 5 of the World Series against the Houston Astros, he’ll have to control his emotions and not be amped up and just follow the game plan and see what happens.
1321	Buxton (shoulder subluxation) said he knew something happened when he hit the wall Thursday in Miami but thought it was more soreness or a strain.
1322	Buying on a creating services is often pretty demanding.
1323	By 11-years-old, Smith made his own band with the help of his school friends named The Blue Jazzers.
1324	By 1943, 8,500 Jews had been deported to concentration camps.
1325	By 2016: 12 countries.
1326	By 3 p.m. the accident was clear.
1327	By applying emotion-oriented techniques to requirements design, the study's findings show that users' emotional expectations are a critical determinant to the success of a new product.
1328	By Bashir Mohammed Kano After over two years of his administration’s fight against corruption, President Muhammadu Buhari, yesterday declared that it’s more difficult tackling the menace than insurgency.
1329	By category, men's running and classic styles posted strong double digit gains, while men's basketball was down mid-single digits.
1330	By Clement Adze BoyeTakordi — A former Deputy Western Regional Minister, Mr Kwasi Blay, who is contesting the chairmanship for the New Patriotic Party (NPP) in the Western North, pledged to build a united front for the party in the new region.
1331	By late Wednesday, three weeks into the semester, the same student posted again to thank Delta staff for helping to fix the issues.
1332	By now, you know how this story ends: Arizona was upset by No. 13 seed Buffalo in the opening round of the NCAA tournament.
1333	By Orbex – The events that stand out include the meeting minutes from the Federal Reserve and the ECB…
1334	“By studying rare diseases and delineating what mechanisms cause those diseases, we may reveal potential therapeutic options for other, more common, diseases as well.”
1335	Bytecoin (BCN) traded 12.9% lower against the dollar and now trades at $0.0004 or 0.00000004 BTC.
1336	By the end of 2018, he had almost doubled the revenue benchmark from N3.2 trillion in 2015 to N5.3 trillion.
1337	“By the end of it, it was so emotional for us," Fulcher remembers.
1338	By the end, you'll know what it takes to guide any team from that first budget outline to the launch party.
1339	By then, the sun was at its peak and sunshine started filtering through the trees.
1340	By the third quarter, the breeze had dropped but was still favouring Leongatha, helping them to make a couple of goals early.
1341	By the time you read this however, Gaggan will be on the verge of closing.
1342	By the way I also think registrant is lucky in this case…very lucky!
1343	By this time, he had not brought out any new novel since 1966.
1344	Bytom (BTM) traded 1.5% lower against the dollar and now trades at $0.13 or 0.00001707 BTC.
1345	Caisse DE Depot ET Placement DU Quebec grew its position in Fluor Co. (NEW) by 39.3% in the second quarter.
1346	Caitlin, you and your husband have been diligently paying down your mortgage with amazing speed.
1347	CAIT wants action against MS Dhoni for endorsing realtor AmrapaliAuditors have said that Amrapali Group entered into "sham agreements" with Rhiti Sports which promotes the brand of MS Dhoni.
1348	California Governor Gavin Newsom signed a bill this week that gives state regulators more power to shut down race tracks with safety issues.
1349	California is one of nine state prison systems that already banned the charges, but the group said California is the first to also abolish the practice in county jails.
1350	California’s Health Insurance Marketplace, Covered California, began its 2020 open enrollment period on October 15th and will continue through January 31st.
1351	Called "Raion," it features six face buttons -- four of which are labeled with PS4 shapes, such as circle and triangle.
1352	Call for information.
1353	Calling privacy a 'fundamental right', he said it had to be a 'guiding principle' for the company.
1354	Callum McManaman will also be absent from the trip to Elland Road, while Gary Roberts, Daniel Fox and Anthony Pilkington are doutbful for the clash.
1355	Calmly and reasonably, Lord Pannick, whom I had the privilege to be represented by in my successful legal challenge to Theresa May’s government over its attempt to over-rule parliamentary sovereignty, spelt out the law.
1356	CALM stepped in to assist with the multiple tasks at hand.
1357	CalRecycle Director Scott Smithline, who is retiring at year's end, said the fine is part of agency actions that includes intensified inspections.
1358	Calyxt (NASDAQ:CLXT) was upgraded by analysts at Zacks Investment Research from a hold rating to a buy rating.
1359	Cambridge is second, at £583m, with other UK cities continuing to make considerable ground.
1360	Cami loved quiet mornings spent on her back porch enjoying a cup of her favorite Dunkins’ coffee with her little dogs snuggled in her lap.
1361	Canada announced on Mar. 1 that the extradition hearing against Meng would proceed.
1362	Canada reports 150 active rigs, up eleven from the week before.
1363	Canara Bank has an employee strength of 58,350, while Syndicate Bank has 31,535.
1364	Candidate Cortney Nielsen works as a merchandiser and sales associate for over a hundred stores and believes her experience with people gives her the skills to listen to citizen’s needs.
1365	Candidates’ résumés and policy proposals alone do not tell us how they would govern.
1366	Can he still impress without the booty-popping?
1367	Can his idol Elvis mentor him through a mid-life crisis before it becomes his final crisis?
1368	CanSurvive Cancer Support group meeting, Actonville cancer patients or survivors are welcome, Wattville Library, Dlamini Street, Wattville, 10am (Ronnie Nkabinde 078 692 4839).
1369	Can this be a thing?
1370	Canucks: At Philadelphia on Monday.
1371	Can we objectively ask and analyze the constitutional role he was to play and actually played at the inauguration ceremony?
1372	Can you really?
1373	Capital projects lead to the empowerment of more people.
1374	Capparelli, owner of Italian eatery Capparelli's on Main, took to Facebook last Tuesday to ask for a "a little love" from friends.
1375	“Captain Marvel” is not your typical superhero origin story.
1376	Carbon Dioxide Levels in Earth's Atmosphere Hit a Record High The World Meteorological Organization just released a grim report on carbon dioxide levels.
1377	Cardano (ADA) traded 7.7% higher against the dollar and now trades at $0.0701 or 0.00000598 BTC.
1378	CARDIFF, United Kingdom: Jason Roy hit the highest individual score of the World Cup so far as England got their campaign back on track with a 106-run win over Bangladesh in Cardiff on Saturday (Jun 8).
1379	Carefully turn them over, sprinkle lightly with salt and pepper and cook until they become opaque in centre, about 3 minutes (check with the point of a sharp knife).
1380	Carey said the coaches will review film to improve the team before its 3:30 p.m. matchup with Georgia Tech next Saturday at Lincoln Financial Field.
1381	Carl Stankowski stopped 32 of 35 shots for the Vees with Cal Schell turning aside 38 of 42 shots for the Eagles.
1382	Carmit, who went on to form the group LadyStation, said: 'We all went to the Spice Girls' reunion tour at the Staples Centre in LA.
1383	Carnegie Science Center Was ‘Alive With The Sound Of Music’
1384	Caroline O'Donovan is a senior technology reporter for BuzzFeed News and is based in San Francisco.
1385	“Carrots are beautifully sweet, earthy and complex in their own unique way.
1386	Carrot’s dialogue, characters, and scenery changes are a fun way to get current, hourly, and daily forecasts.
1387	• Carrying out inspections of the facilities to identify and resolve issues.
1388	Cars in the 1950s featured a leather substitute called Naugahyde, a material that looked and felt like vinyl, Takahashi pointed out.
1389	Casa Systems, meanwhile, reported a 34% revenue decline, with CEO Jerry Guo lamenting that his operator clients are still in a “digestion phase” with all the gear Casa has already sold to them over the last few years.
1390	Case and Deaton suggest that, if left uncontrolled, the opioid epidemic could combine with other factors to transform American society even more drastically.
1391	Case in point: kids who love construction play have their choice of backhoes, bulldozers and vehicles, but what if one of those union workers needs to use the toilet?
1392	Cassidy and Kennedy met with Carson and other White House officials to hash out the issue, and Kennedy sat down personally with President Donald Trump last month to talk about the regulatory hurdles.
1393	Catalina's dance floor was the place to be.
1394	Catcoin (CURRENCY:CAT) traded flat against the dollar during the twenty-four hour period ending at 14:00 PM E.T. on January 20th.
1395	Catholic Social Services of the Miami Valley based in Dayton, Ohio, has started sending a food truck to outlying areas more frequently than the usual once or twice a month.
1396	Cattle Decapitation and Revocation touring Australia in February 2020.
1397	Caught up in Brexit, the UK government doesn’t have the bandwidth to play a role in European politics any more.
1398	CAU President Dr. George T. French Jr.issued a written statement on Twitter offering his condolences to the Crawford family.
1399	Cavalier County had at least three young ladies who had received either their M.D. degrees or specialist degrees beyond that level in 2019.
1400	Ceasing to sell some types of ammo in an effort to focus on only selling bullets to people who pinky-swear they’ll only shoot deer and not people might mean that Walmart will now only supply 9 percent of the ammunition in America.
1401	Cebolla Verde is open 7 days a week, from 11 a.m. until 2 a.m. Major credit cards are accepted.
1402	Cecil D. Spear of Glasgow, Mont., age 78, passed away at Valley View Nursing Home in Glasgow on Sunday, Sept. 15, 2019.
1403	Celebrate Highwood was established to help restore Highwood's 'destination' status that it enjoyed a century ago.
1404	Celorio concluded her talk by discussing issues the system faces when trying to prosecute cases.
1405	Cena played his veteran role to perfection, transitioning into McIntyre’s angry stuff.
1406	Center for American Progress president Neera Tanden will join Nadler for the discussion.
1407	Central sprinted out to a big lead and eventually wrangled up a 57-32 victory from the Charles C. Marsh Gymnasium – getting contributions from up and down the line-up.
1408	Certain apps, such as email and social networks, constantly run in the background even when you’re not using them.
1409	Certainly, he has nothing else left to sell having already flogged his collection of antique cars, pocket watches and chessboards in order to keep his business afloat and his vulnerable customers warm.
1410	CESU has also requested all its customers and the general public to abide by safety rules and take the utmost care in dealing with electricity”, the official added.
1411	Chad Gable wins by submission with the ankle lock.
1412	Chainlink (LINK) traded 3% lower against the dollar and now trades at $2.18 or 0.00021508 BTC.
1413	Chairman of the party in the state, Anselm Ojezua, in a statement warned that the party would not allow the “reckless antics of shameless and selfish individuals to dictate the fortunes of the party.”
1414	Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee Senator Chuck Grassley, Republican of Iowa, with ranking member Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, during the first hearing on prescription drug costs in January.
1415	Champions from each division win $500 in prize money to designate to a teacher or school program of their choice.
1416	Chances fell for Chennaiyin but poor decision-making meant the scores remained level.
1417	Changing your password takes less than a minute.
1418	Channelling some ‘Mr and Mrs Smith’ vibes, the poster sees Prabhas crouched on the floor with Shraddha guarding his back as they fire away at the bad guys.
1419	Chantel -- who worried her marriage was "doomed" when she dropped Pedro off at the airport -- then told the cameras, "Right now, I feel like my marriage could be lost."
1420	CHAPEL HILL, NC - Demonstrators rally for the removal of a Confederate statue coined Silent Sam on the campus of the University of Chapel Hill on August 22, 2017 in Chapel Hill North Carolina.
1421	Charity begins at home, and I’m so glad that these children have learned to care for others.”
1422	Charlene had many passions in her life, her utmost favorite was being “Nana”.
1423	Charles C. W. Cooke responds to a letter in our last issue.
1424	CHARLOTTE, N.C. — Singer/Songwriter and Prince Protege, sang with Prince for 10 years.
1425	Charter operators are also urged to employ flight data monitoring programs, which help detect problems before a crash.
1426	Chastain leads all playoff drivers with three wins this season.
1427	Chatsworth is a major tourist attraction in Britain; tourists stream through the public portions of the house and garden even while the couple, Peregrine and Amanda Devonshire, are in residence.
1428	Chattan Kunjara Na Ayudhya, TAT deputy governor for Asian and South Pacific markets, and other TAT executives attended the ceremony.
1429	Check of the protector of Hell’s Kitchen below!
1430	Check out all the movies and more here!
1431	Check out the snow brushed mountain in Winter Park!
1432	Check out what they had to say below.
1433	Chef Anna Hansen may have recently departed from her decade-long stint at the helm of The Modern Pantry, but many of her much lauded dishes remain.
1434	Chef Matt Carter's (of the Mission and Zinc Bistro) restaurant is set in a charming yet sophisticated little 1920s bungalow in Old Town Scottsdale.
1435	Chelsea cut loan army from 41 to 27 ahead of FIFA crackdown as they turn in massive summer profit of over.
1436	Chennai (730 km from Alappuzha) is the farthest place I have been to, that too on a school trip.
1437	Cherry-Evans was spotted hopping into a cryotherapy machine at the back of Lottoland and while there was an ankle scare against the Warriors, he had no such problems against the Tigers.
1438	Cheryl Andrews-Maltais, chairman of the Wampanoag tribe, was selected to be a panelist at the Frank.
1439	Chick-fil-A’s charitable arm, the Chick-fil-A Foundation, it will focus donations on a small number of organizations in the areas of hunger, homelessness and education and cease donations to the FCA and the Salvation Army.
1440	Chief Danielle Outlaw said in a statement that an internal review would be conducted to see if policies were violated.
1441	Chief Emeka Okpoko, another Senior Advocate of Nigeria believed the constitution amendment will relieve the Supreme Court of the monumental burden of cases congestion.
1442	Chief Executive Officer and co-founder Mark Zuckerberg has said he should stay, citing the importance of diversity of opinion at the company.
1443	Chief Financial Officer Brian Olsavsky said on Thursday's earnings call that the company spent slightly more than $800 million on its expansion plans in the quarter.
1444	Chief Justice Sophia Akuffo enrolled to the Bar in Ghana on the 2nd of October, 1975.
1445	Chief Nhlanhlayamangwe Ndiweni appearing in court.
1446	Children's school lunchboxes contain up to 14 teaspoons of.
1447	Chilean anti riots police officer arrest an anti government demonstrator during a protest in Santiago de Chile, Chile.
1448	Chilliwack resident Brandon William Janveaux has been charged with assault with a weapon and assault causing bodily harm.
1449	Chilmark resident Brian O’Gorman, who said he owned the vessel, told The Times it broke its anchor from a nearby location off the beach.
1450	China Biologic Products had a return on equity of 8.56% and a net margin of 29.46%.
1451	China has had non-governmental organizations (NGOs) since the by leadership within the Chinese Communist Party around 2007 to 2012, including Chen Weiguang, the Chairman of the Guangzhou Federation of Trade Unions (GZFTU).
1452	China, having the second-largest defence worldwide, “recently displayed a lot of new modern capabilities, including long-range missiles able to reach all of Europe, US,” NATO-Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg said after the NATO summit in December.
1453	China would see itself become preeminent nation, with unrestricted power projection and the ability to prevail in any conflict with any power.
1454	Chisholm began to regain consciousness on May 12 but is still not out of danger and faces a prolonged recovery.
1455	Chitungwiza Acting Town Clerk Dr Tonderai Kasu said council was working with law enforcement agents in restoring sanity in the town.
1456	Choosing the perfect template assists saving a good deal of cash and time.
1457	Chris Beard is a real leader of men.
1458	Chris Dwan as David Kolowitz and Allie Trimm as his steadfast girlfriend Wanda, in “Enter Laughing.”
1459	Chris Evans is reluctantt to return as Captain America because he does not want to ruin the character's perfect ending.
1460	Chris Sale did a huge favor Wednesday night when he pitched a complete-game shutout.
1461	Chrissy Teigen FaceTimed one of her fans.
1462	Christina Koch and Jessica Meir will together venture outside the space station at precisely 7:50 a.m. Thursday, Oct. 17 or Friday, Oct. 18.
1463	Christmas comes but once a year – so there’s no need to buy all-new decorations every December.
1464	Chuck Walsh, a Florida State spokesman, said Mike Cofer had been dealing with a long illness.
1465	Ciani reconnected with Buchla himself in the mid-1990s and stayed friends until his 2016 death.
1466	Ciara will be hosting the American Music Awards on Sunday.
1467	Cigna has a one year low of $141.95 and a one year high of $226.60.
1468	Cinnaholic, located at 2670 Tuscany Street Suite 104 in Corona, is selling a “Noah Cinnamon Roll” with 10 percent of proceeds being donated to the Joyful Hearts Foundation for child abuse awareness.
1469	Circuit Judge Thomas Ambro, who wrote the majority opinion, said the decision was unlikely to spur a flood of litigation, given how "the overwhelming majority" of screeners do their jobs professionally "despite far more grumbling than appreciation."
1470	CIS ranks the bug severity as high for large and medium organizations, and medium for small ones.
1471	Cited in the dismissal decision is the failure of ACT to submit certified true copies of the memoranda issued by the intelligence units of the PNP as required under Rule 65 concerning Rule 46 of the Rules of Court.
1472	Cities and towns across Connecticut have formed volunteer committees to help with the census.
1473	Citigroup boosted their price objective on General Motors from $67.00 to $68.00 and gave the company a “buy” rating in a research report on Friday, August 2nd.
1474	Citizenship Bill violates basic structure of Constitution, very foundation of the Republic.
1475	City and county officials last week voted to give the company 15 years to operate on the site property tax-free.
1476	City councilman Jim Eister tells us the city, in conjunction with the municipal authority, applied for a grant of about $500,000 to fund the project.
1477	City Council votes to create new HS diversity task forceSkip to main contentThanks for contacting us.
1478	City of London Investment Management Co. Ltd. now owns 1,930,251 shares of the exchange traded fund’s stock valued at $73,726,000 after buying an additional 1,003,900 shares during the period.
1479	Class 1A-3A soccer and Class 2A football are dropping from 12 to eight.
1480	Clearbridge Investments LLC grew its position in Thermo Fisher Scientific by 2.4% in the 1st quarter.
1481	ClearCoin has a market capitalization of $94,043.00 and approximately $2.00 worth of ClearCoin was traded on exchanges in the last day.
1482	Cleveland shot just 26.5% from three-point range (per ESPN), but again, it was the first game, and with the Cavaliers having a first-time NBA head coach in and with the squad having plenty of new faces, the offensive production will come.
1483	Click here to connect with 21C Metals Inc. (CSE:BULL) (FSE:DCR1) (OTCQB:DCNNF) for an Investor Presentation.
1484	Climate change has led to a greatly accelerated rate of inland ice melting in Greenland.
1485	Clive Emson auctioneer Kevin Gilbert said: "Of the proposed houses, three would have four bedrooms and three would have two.
1486	Clockwise from left: Maya Erskine in “Pen15”; Wesley Snipes in “Dolemite Is My Name”; Zendaya in “Euphoria”.
1487	Cloudy, with a low around 71. North wind around 8 mph.
1488	Clubs and organizations such as SHPE, PRISM, BSU and NSBE offer a community to those on campus who desperately need a place for people who look like them.
1489	Coaches and teammates took that opportunity to catch up with Luis, then a sophomore at Morgan State studying business.
1490	Coaches Samantha Nicholson and Cate D’Offay said they were thrilled with the win and attributed the team’s success to hard work and commitment.
1491	“Coach Hoffman has made an indelible mark on the Mercer basketball program,” Cole said.
1492	Coach (Joe) Rudolph and Coach (Paul) Chryst took a shot on me.
1493	Cod and lobster were once both major fisheries in Maine, but their productivity has gone in opposite directions in recent years.
1494	Cody Parkey will be cut on June 1 after missing a game-winning kick in a playoff game against the Eagles.
1495	Cohen got clear of Rams linebacker Cory Littleton and barely stepped inside the right pylon.
1496	Colac West needed four runs from the final over in the under-17 grand final at Colac’s lake oval.
1497	Colbert brought up how according to CNN, one of Trump’s advisers said, “Frankly, I think he’s a little surprised it’s the Ukraine thing that’s done it.”
1498	Coleman hits out after USADA whereabouts charge dropped We use cookies to collect and analyse information on site performance and usage, and to enhance and customise content and advertisements.
1499	Collaboration and a sense of shared responsibility are at the heart of the Global Compact on Refugees.
1500	Colleen Shalby is a reporter for the Los Angeles Times.
1501	Collin Hoyt, Brody Hagen and Karger walked to load the bases to set up Eischens’ game-winning hit.
1502	Collins is set to become a free agent next month, and ESPN’s Josina Anderson reported on Wednesday that he has cleaned out his locker at the team’s facility and said goodbye to teammates, coaches and staff members.
1503	Colorado schools and districts receive performance ratings to let them and their communities know how well they are doing.
1504	Colored areas highlight several identifiedvibration bands of the carbazole.
1505	COLUMBIA, SC ( WOLO) — Hurricane Dorian is now a category 5 storm with 160 mph sustained winds, according to the national Hurricane center.
1506	COLUMBUS, Ohio (CBS Local) — Ohio State University has discovered a high-tech solution to feeding hungry students when the closest dining hall is closed.
1507	Combined with AI, these technologies can warn city workers of impending floods, or help doctors accurately diagnose diseases.
1508	Combined with the mobile apps, players can enjoy the games cross-platform, requiring only one account.
1509	Comey got the special counsel he wanted to be appointed, and for two years, they were led to believe they had Trump on the ropes.
1510	Comic fans are always looking to how accurately the work on the page will be adapted for the silver screen.
1511	Coming from “a place of privilege,” he ruefully acknowledged, had given him “a massive blind spot.”
1512	Coming in first place was Mohammed Skaik.
1513	Coming Up Very s00n - bill to loosen Drug-Control Laws?
1514	Communication is essential.
1515	Community Bank N.A. now owns 13,500 shares of the utilities provider’s stock valued at $614,000 after buying an additional 10,640 shares during the last quarter.
1516	Community Bank System has a 1 year low of $54.46 and a 1 year high of $67.79.
1517	Community milestones this February – Jewish IndependentWhere different views on Israel and Judaism are welcome.
1518	Comparatively, 94.4% of Proofpoint shares are owned by institutional investors.
1519	Comparing science education today to 50 years ago, McQuarrie says, “It’s definitely more hands on and more global in trying to see the connection to systems within our environment, rather than discrete topics you may never touch upon again.”
1520	Comparisons were based on jobs requiring similar skills, qualifications and responsibilities at other school districts and Dallas employers.
1521	“Complex cases such as this are why it is challenging yet so rewarding to be a doctor,” Vaughan said.
1522	Composed from the outset in the final, there was no theatrical collapse on the red clay or vaulting of the net when she sealed victory, with a simple smash of a ball that had bounced just over the net.
1523	Comprehensive Portfolio Management LLC owned 0.20% of iShares Core MSCI Pacific ETF worth $2,050,000 as of its most recent filing with the Securities & Exchange Commission.
1524	Computer information technology, web design and development are degree options for students, and available associate’s degrees include computer information systems and web design and development.
1525	Concept plans for the project, along with the Lido fire station, are scheduled to be presented to Council on Sept. 24.
1526	Concord-based Prapela created a device to treat withdrawal symptoms in opioid-addicted infants.
1527	Condolences may be offered to www.clementswilcoxburnet.com.
1528	‘Confidence is everything, it really is, it’s unreal how it affects every single aspect of any player’s performance, and I thought by the end of it he looked shattered.
1529	Confirmation requires only 51 votes.
1530	Congratulations sir, on successfully launching the commissions,” he said.
1531	Congress has often before seated critics of Israel, including some—such as the late Representative Paul Findley of Illinois—who conspiratorial anti-Semitism.
1532	Consecrated Life – Some men and women are called to become monks, nuns, and religious brothers and sisters.
1533	Consequently, Justice Obiozor found the defendant guilty on all counts and sentenced him to four years imprisonment on counts one and two without an option of fine and 10 years on counts three, four, five and six without an option of fine.
1534	Conservation specialists and technicians with the local conservation district or the West Virginia Conservation Agency will visit the farm, take photos and complete a site visit form to document conditions.
1535	Considering his age he got off much better than the people in the other car.”
1536	Considering since the last CBA, the cohesiveness has lacked for many teams…
1537	Constellation Brands, an American company that sells Corona and a bunch of other Mexican beers, plunged 7%.
1538	Constitutional Law Professor: In a Single Tweet, Rudy Giuliani Admitted to the ‘Highest of High Crimes’
1539	Consult a dietitian or doctor for their guidance, he said, and ask yourself if you are willing to commit to the diet for the long term.
1540	Consultations are ongoing in the city and county with migrant and host communities with the aim of creating an evidence based strategy locally.
1541	Consumers are also holding on to their devices for much longer.
1542	Contemporary tales of horror and haunting for the diverse and digital age.
1543	Conversely, the players on the two Chinese teams spent extensive time living out of suitcases and hockey bags in hotels while they traveled to Canada and Massachusetts to play.
1544	“Cool she reading a book love reading,” observed a fan.
1545	COPPA ITALIA – “We need to improve a couple of things.
1546	Corbett's also has a dedicated fryer for fries, so no cross contamination.
1547	Corbyn arrives on time, chats to the owner then comes through to join me.
1548	Corrado said the bill would not be retroactive.
1549	Corruption is another factor among government officials, agencies and rangers.
1550	Cosmos (ATOM) traded 5.7% higher against the dollar and now trades at $3.03 or 0.00036238 BTC.
1551	Cost of sales reduced by 10 percent compared with the previous year while overheads also reduced by 4 percent to R555 million.
1552	Could it be possible that I had the time in my years to fill each of these thousands or even millions of cards?
1553	Could it be that the chances of the UK leaving the EU with a deal in October have gone up?
1554	Could it lead to greater flexibility over the backstop?
1555	Councillor Holger Hase (Free Democrats), whose party supported the motion, was however critical of the language used – particularly as the city was one of the contenders for the 2025 European Capital of Culture designation.
1556	Councillor Steve Pitt, deputy leader of the council, said he was ‘happy to help spread the word’ and said: ‘Plastic Free Portsmouth is doing a great job of reminding us all that we need to look after our city by not leaving litter behind.
1557	Councillors were also concerned about lighting on the site.
1558	Council member Bret Andries moved to approve the bid from Ergon Asphalt & Emulsions, Inc. for seal oil for the project in the amount of $48,000 with funds to come from the Capital Improvement – Streets fund.
1559	Counos Coin (CCA) traded down 2.6% against the dollar and now trades at $4.54 or 0.00065532 BTC.
1560	County Administrator Ken Pabich says he was pleased with the dialogue that came out of the informational item…
1561	Couple transform their cramped living space into a 'grown-up party room' on George Clarke's Old House, New Home - but unimpressed viewers claim it looks more like a 'bachelor pad'
1562	Coveney is commenting here after Irish prime minister Leo Varadkar met up with the DUP last night to discuss on the backstop issue.
1563	Coventry University will be visiting the following locations in Abuja, Port Harcourt and Lagos this May to offer automatic £2,500 scholarships to students applying for the September 2019 academic session.
1564	CPI(M) Polit Bureau member Brinda Karat has written to Home Minister Amit Shah demanding action against YouTube for allowing circulation of some videos which she alleged were designed to "incite communal hatred".
1565	“Create a VAT registration threshold to eliminate VAT compliance burden for small businesses.
1566	Creating flexible office hours for employees, can help significantly in improving employee satisfaction, able to organise work around their personal schedule and ensuring workers are happier with their timetables.
1567	Credit Suisse Group set a €50.00 ($58.14) price target on shares of Fresenius SE & Co KGaA and gave the company a “neutral” rating in a report on Monday, May 6th.
1568	Crews are focusing on assest protection.
1569	Crews had left by 5.26am.
1570	CRICKET-IPL-Gayle helps Punjab to victory, Russell fires in loss“A renewed attack on member states”
1571	Crime Stoppers will pay up to $5,000 for information that leads to an arrest and indictment in the case.
1572	Cr Kirwan said the “regressive” and “timid” document missed the chance to allow members-of-the-public to verbally ask questions at council meetings.
1573	Crossmark Global Holdings Inc. lifted its position in Invacare by 12.5% in the 2nd quarter.
1574	Crown prosecutor Steve Baribeau told the jury Ugo Fredette couldn't accept the end of his relationship with Véronique Barbe, 41, so the accused allegedly stabbed her 17 times, in front of a child.
1575	"Crucially, it also ensures that after Brexit, environmental ambition and accountability are placed more clearly than ever before at the heart of government, both now and in the future," she added.
1576	Cruise vessel “Resolute” was due in the Falkland Islands on October 22 but the call was cancelled.
1577	Cruz was taken by ambulance to the Karl Heusner Memorial Hospital where he was admitted in a stable condition.
1578	Crypto.com Chain (CRO) traded 3.3% lower against the dollar and now trades at $0.0636 or 0.00000826 BTC.
1579	C-TRADE gives investors the flexibility to access the platform in different ways namely, online, mobile application and the unstructured supplementary service data (USSD) whichever is convenient.
1580	CUB’s well-maintained asset quality coupled with superior margins paint a positive outlook for the bank.
1581	Cullen Frost Bankers Inc. acquired a new position in shares of Baidu during the first quarter valued at $45,000.
1582	Cultural potential, ability, talent and achievement, were recognised in a bid to support the local community’s cultural development.
1583	Cummings’ other runner on Friday is Glamour Cat, a Gerry Harvey-owned mare from the businessman/breeder’s acclaimed St Klaire family.
1584	Cummins is the new man in.
1585	Curbing fraud was among the recommendations to the local insurance sector to improve its profitability which has remained vulnerable in recent years especially due to losses in underwriting.
1586	Currently, 1.7% of the shares of the stock are sold short.
1587	Currently the app is only available to iPhone users in the UK, New Zealand and Australia.
1588	Currently, the Track Chair is only able to be used on the Bay View Trail, which can be accessed from the Kelderhouse Farm on Port Oneida Road about three miles north of Glen Arbor.
1589	Customers became increasingly concerned about economic trends and many decided to defer capital expenditures until they had greater clarity on the economic environment.”
1590	Customers were “unable to access, send, or receive email” through those accounts, said a company statement sent to Global News.
1591	CWM LLC now owns 221 shares of the programmable devices maker’s stock worth $28,000 after buying an additional 153 shares during the last quarter.
1592	CyrusOne posted earnings per share of $0.85 in the same quarter last year, which suggests a negative year-over-year growth rate of 9.4%.
1593	D.A. Davidson & CO. boosted its holdings in First Trust Senior Loan ETF by 4.0% during the 4th quarter.
1594	D.A. Davidson & CO. now owns 73,959 shares of the financial services provider’s stock valued at $1,458,000 after acquiring an additional 3,760 shares during the period.
1595	Dad wearily opens the suitcase and begins the laborious process of repacking it – except the canoe and the crocodile won’t deflate properly.
1596	Daisy Pearce and Darcy Vescio had been respectively for and against the new deal.
1597	Dak Prescott will remain in the game, but Amari Cooper is questionable to return.
1598	Dak will sign a new contract, that’s a lock.
1599	Dallas’ Luka Doncic collected 27 points, eight assists and seven rebounds to mark the 19th consecutive contest in which he recorded at least 20, five and five in those categories.
1600	Damaged roofs are among the largest costs, he said.
1601	Damiris Dantas scored 20 points to pace seventh-seeded Minnesota.
1602	DA MPL in the Free State Dr Roy Jankielsohn says the party will submit questions to Premier Sisi Ntombela regarding allegations made by the former General Secretary of the messianic churches Buyisile Ngqulwana.
1603	Dance is Arthur’s escape, his life force.
1604	Danny Bonaduce wrote how on his birthday, while live on the radio, they gave him the news his father passed away, and Danny said, "He finally got me something I wanted."
1605	Dan Parker, director of Indianapolis Department of Public Works, noted that it could take as much as $1.5 billion to bring everything up to fair condition.
1606	Dara has everything.
1607	Daramola, had said, “A Nigerian Air Force helicopter was lost in combat while providing close air support to troops of 145 Battalion at Damasak in Northern Borno State.
1608	Dark Castle Entertainment was a studio initially created to solely remake Castle’s films and they started with his best.
1609	Dark purplish black berries that started ripening a few weeks ago are now being depleted.
1610	Dark reds show record warmest temperatures.
1611	Dashboard camera footage of a car swerving in and out of a traffic lane along the Central Expressway (CTE), near Braddell Road, was shared on the ROADS.sg Facebook group on Monday morning.
1612	DA spokesperson Solly Malatsi at the press conference on October 23 where Mmusi Maimane announced his resignation as party leader of the Democratic Alliance.
1613	Data Pipeline Developer: Primarily back-end focus.
1614	Date bars were distributed to 3,235 individuals at both collective centres in Tal Hamis and Areesheh camp.
1615	Dated to March 6, the petition is addressed to Monaco, Chairman to the Board of Trustees Peter Dolan and Dean of the Medical School Harris Berman.
1616	Dave Itzkoff, a feature writer for The Times, flew to London to meet with two of the film’s stars, who appear onscreen together for only the third time, after “Heat” and the lesser-known cop drama “Righteous Kill.”
1617	David Eason hasnâ€™t said anything about Jenelle posting photos of his daughter on social media, a daughter he supposedly hasnâ€™t seen since Jenelle took her away from their home.
1618	David Edgar of the Heart & Hand Rangers summed it up: “A performance we have seen far too often from them this season where they started slowly, no tempo at all, no urgency in their play.
1619	' David Harbour had a rough time at the box office earlier in 2019 with coming up, along with Marvel's in 2020.
1620	“David has been a bit shaken up.
1621	David Lean would make the sublime Brief Encounter out of a Noël Coward play only a year after this rather weak effort from the same pairing, which depicts the lives of “ordinary people” between the wars.
1622	Davies was jailed for 12 weeks and ordered to pay £115 victim surcharge and £85 costs.
1623	Davinci Coin (DAC) traded up 4.1% against the dollar and now trades at $0.0029 or 0.00000035 BTC.
1624	Davis’ two brothers had been gunned down less than a block away in separate shootings during the prior six years, during a violent era in New York City.
1625	Daylight also helps the suprachiasmatic nucleus to reset our waking time if our sleep cycles start to drift.
1626	Day-time restrictions have now been lifted from 69 police stations across the Kashmir valley said J&K Principal Secretary of the Planning Commission Rohit Kansal.
1627	DAYTON, Ohio (AP) — Police worked Monday to pin down why a 24-year-old gunman killed nine people, including his sister, in a weekend shooting rampage in a popular nightlife area in Dayton, Ohio.
1628	Deb and Gord Sexton lived next door to the Wonch family for 13 years on Kingfisher Drive and even helped them move up to Penticton around three years ago.
1629	Deborah Finkler, Turneffe Island Resort’s sales and marketing manager, wanted to thank all the persons who voted in their favor, saying that the entire resort is elated to have been selected.
1630	Debra Elaine (Bradshaw) Leach, 65, of Chappell went to home to our heavenly father on Monday, September 9, 2019 after fighting a tough battle with COPD.
1631	December we saw a lorry belonging to Mwenifumbo carrying over 100 people from Kasoba, Mpata and Karonga boma and took them to Mikoma Lodge to prepare for transfers from Karonga North-West to Karonga Central during voter verification exercise.
1632	Dee Ann Abernathy kept her daughters home from school.
1633	Defence minister Rajnath Singh on Thursday flew in the Tejas fighter aircraft from the HAL airport in Bengaluru, becoming the first defence minister to fly in the indigenously-built light combat aircraft (LCA).
1634	Defending champion Patrick Reed is grouped with 2012 U.S. Open winner Webb Simpson and reigning U.S. Amateur champion Viktor Hovland.
1635	Definitely, but we are making headway.
1636	Del Rey was tagged in Cyrus and Grande's posts, suggesting the trio has formed a musical "Charlie's Angels".
1637	Delta, due to publish third-quarter results on Thursday before the market opens, last week raised its estimate for growth in third-quarter cost per available seat mile, excluding fuel costs, to about 2.5per cent, in part due to employee wage increases.
1638	Demi Rose PICTURE EXCLUSIVE: Model turns up the heat as she.
1639	Democratic House speaker Nancy Pelosi was initially reluctant to launch a formal impeachment inquiry.
1640	Democrats and Republicans in the House Judiciary Committee voted along strict party lines, 23 to 17, appearing somber as they put Trump on track to become only the third president to be impeached in US history.
1641	Democrats at this pace seem to be moving that process much more rapidly than at least previous impeachments have."
1642	Democrats have said articles of impeachment -- formal charges -- against Trump could be completed in as little as a month and swiftly voted on in the House, where the party has a majority.
1643	Demo-gogues: “The idea that we don’t have elimination of assault-type weapons, magazines that can hold multiple bullets in them, it’s absolutely mindless.”
1644	Dempster will be the only underwater musician in the entire opera as he will be in the shallow end, playing his cello while underwater microphones transmit the sounds above the surface.
1645	Dench in the clip shown at CinemaCon: “We spent a very very long time preparing how to be a cat.”
1646	Denis Doyle, VP & GM – Manufacturing, Analog Devices, said, “Thanks to the foresight and public investment of Limerick City and County Council and the Department of Education and Skills, the facilities at Mungret park and playground are fantastic.
1647	Denis Ryan reads from his prepared statement.
1648	DENVER — A conceptual plan for a 10-story office building has been submitted for a 1.85-acre site on Brighton Boulevard.
1649	DENVER - In the Aurora mobile home park where she lived for 16 years, eviction notices kept coming to Petra Bennett’s door -- for unauthorized guests, lack of insurance, late rent.
1650	Department said South-west monsoon is established over the island and that therefore, showery and windy conditions are expected to enhance further, particularly in the South-western part.
1651	Depending on the geographical conditions of the area, for example, Russian bees are considered to be more resistant to cold weather, varroa mites and tracheal mites, but produce less honey than their Italian counterparts.
1652	Depending on the track of the system, more significant coastal flooding may occur especially over coastal Alabama.
1653	Deputies were able to quickly determine the vehicle involved, a Ford pickup, had been reported stolen the day before in the city of Ucon and the female was identified as 25-year-old Danielle M. Downey of Idaho Falls.
1654	Derek McInnes admits 'there is no love lost' between Aberdeen and Rangers.
1655	D. E. Shaw & Co. Inc. increased its stake in shares of Marathon Oil Co. (NYSE:MRO) by 4.5% during the second quarter, according to the company in its most recent disclosure with the SEC.
1656	Designed by architect John Russell Pope, the memorial features circular marble steps, a portico, a circular colonnade of ionic order columns, and a shallow dome.
1657	Designed with incredible improvements to all its essential device features, the has already captured the imagination of the world.
1658	Desist from using a mobile lift table for loads that lack stability on level ground.
1659	Despite his failing health, he continued to assist those who called on him for advice.
1660	Despite his fitness woes initially, Cummins has persevered to return as an even stronger bowler and he has not looked back since his international return in 2017.
1661	Despite increased visibility, they still face barriers every single day.
1662	Despite pulling his 20-foot eagle putt just short on the 18th hole, DeChambeau sank the ensuing birdie tap-in to close the second round at 12-under 132.
1663	Despite receiving the letters, there is no change in these high-class clubs,” the official added.
1664	Despite supporters’ expectations and law enforcement’s fears, Plumas County sheriff’s Deputy Ed Obayashi, a use-of-force expert, called the stricter Assembly Bill 392 “an exercise in legal futility.”
1665	Despite the American pressure and the four government meetings convened on the matter, Israel has yet to formulate its policy about doing business with China.
1666	Despite the argument presented by Stuombos, both parties including the judge acknowledged that Hasan is legally entitled to bond, as none of the charges against Hasan are punishable by life or capital offenses.
1667	Despite the legalization of hemp, the status of CBD as a consumer product remains murky.
1668	Despite the Modi government claiming that India has one of the most open foreign investment regimes in the world, it is not there yet.
1669	Despite the roll-back of excess surcharge and a relatively accommodative monetary policy stance, FPI flows will continue to be undermined by a weak global and domestic consumption demand outlook.
1670	Despite the scale of the country’s problem, only about 100 children have attended formal deradicalization programs in Indonesia, Mr. Khairul said.
1671	Destroying Poland would be a difficult thing for Jews.
1672	Deters was suspended from the Sabetha Police Department on Sept. 9 for reasons related to job performance.
1673	Detroit coach Dwane Casey said Johnson is the most skilled player in the NBA at defending LeBron James of the Los Angeles Lakers, a four-time league MVP.
1674	Development of incidental spaces with the potential to attract customers.
1675	DevOps isn't some far off goal; it's methodologies and practices are a response to this demand.
1676	Diaz walked off the field under his own power, and Luis Avilan got the last three outs.
1677	Dickson said once that flight occurs the FAA will need a month before it can allow flights to resume unless something unforeseen arises.
1678	Did a Canadian retailer leak Nest Mini’s pricing and code name?
1679	Did chip in nearly 6 minutes on the PK, but at evens his decision-making and execution were both badly lacking.
1680	Did I make choices that hurt my heart?
1681	Diding said it took her five years to master the art of rice breeding.
1682	Did Jesus bottle it when he met that woman at the well?
1683	"Didn't hit as many good putts as yesterday.
1684	Did they really do it last night?
1685	Did you know that Russia is the main EU supplier of fossil fuels?
1686	Did you say that?
1687	Diego Simeone will want his side to win the fixture and go to the top of the league table before they face Lokomotiv Moscow in their next fixture.
1688	Different combinations of heroes unlock different ways to play and win against the AI or other gamers in online multiplayer matches.
1689	Diggle uses Cisco’s gizmo to open a portal, into which he and then Laurel jump.
1690	Dilian denied knowledge of an alleged $3.5 million sale to the U.A.E., evidence of which was provided in the legal challenge to NSO and Circles in Israel.
1691	Dimensional Fund Advisors LP now owns 124,355 shares of the biotechnology company’s stock valued at $670,000 after acquiring an additional 53,089 shares during the period.
1692	Dimensional Fund Advisors LP now owns 1,691,522 shares of the conglomerate’s stock valued at $81,647,000 after acquiring an additional 138,213 shares during the last quarter.
1693	Director of student access at NESCol Linda Taylor said: “The nursery at Fraserburgh Campus has provided a valuable service for almost 20 years.
1694	“DISA is going to be the center stage for all the cloud activities taking place across the department.”
1695	Disappointed Democrats, however, are determined to get more.
1696	Discover amazing history and legacies at the National WWI Museum and MemorialNegro Leagues Baseball Museum American Jazz Museum.
1697	Disney fan shamed for Mickey engagement ring that made one woman 'throw up'
1698	Disney sells the bottles exclusively at Star Wars Lands in Anaheim, California and Orlando, Florida.
1699	Distraught Katherine Jackson, 88, saw her health suddenly deteriorate over the past few weeks, as she became aware of Wade Robson and James Safechuck's shocking claims in HBO film Leaving Neverland.
1700	DJZ then whipped Ace toward the guardrail.
1701	D. Nixon can stretch you and run as fast as anybody that we face this year.”
1702	Documents made public by Oregon Public Broadcasting showed that third parties connected to NWIW told investors that methanol from the plant could also be sold as fuel overseas.
1703	Doerr is a transportation and environmental activist.
1704	Does driving an ostentatious car turn you into a boorish prat?
1705	Does it mean that Nigerians will continue to be exposed to dangers associated with our roads littered with gullies and potholes?
1706	Does the guy take it or get his buddy to get it for him and give him $10 of it?
1707	Does tuning lower the truck’s lifespan?
1708	Dogs, notably adorable photos of dogs, are a ubiquitous aspect of dating.
1709	Do I disagree with the remainder of his letter?
1710	Do I spend more time dreaming than actually doing?
1711	Dokubo, whose tenure ended May 29, 2019, according to his letter of appointment has illegally remained in office, signing and awarding contracts in what legal analyst say is the “highest form of impunity on display in Buhari’s Government.”
1712	Domestic cats recognize their names even though they may not act like they do, according to a new Japanese study.
1713	Donald, if Denmark won’t play baseball, then don’t worry.
1714	Donâ€™t base your looks, opinions, beliefs, etc on a man and what HE wants.
1715	Donations can be made to the Namibia Farmers Donation Fund.
1716	Donations will be given to the Teton Valley Food Pantry after the holidays for early 2020 needs.
1717	Doncaster council said 970 homes and businesses in the town were affected by the rain between 7 and 15 November.
1718	Donna Hume of Murray River, P.E.I., received an invitation last week to attend Queen Elizabeth's Royal Garden Party at Buckingham Palace on May 29.
1719	Don’t allow cadres to take part in the chairing of national dialogue.
1720	“Don’t ask me how.
1721	Don’t be afraid to call the DNR, and regularly check the Fall Color Finder map.
1722	Don’t crank it up too high though as the music starts to distort at full blast.
1723	'Don't ever come back and make you mother have to sit through this again.'
1724	Don’t forget to find out everything you can about fixed or recurring fees that may add to the amount that you eventually repay.
1725	Don't know exactly how her judgement entered into the equation, once she was handcuffed in the back of a squad car.
1726	Don’t let the market volatility get to you.
1727	“Don’t wait to depart,” he encouraged residents.
1728	Don't you just love this dress.
1729	Don’t you read my posts?”
1730	Do the Marvel films and the franchise have anything in common?
1731	Doubtless the same could be said of all names, although in language there is sometimes an inherent and inescapable ring to a word, noun or otherwise.
1732	Douglas updated the City Council at Monday’s meeting said the festival saw a lot of rain all four days, and quite a lot on Friday of the festival, however she said the festival came close to breaking even, with a loss of about $995.
1733	Do we accept homelessness, the hungry, shanty towns, hygienic conditions, etc for any among us?
1734	Dowell and her husband frantically tried to stop the crying as fellow passengers eyed them.
1735	Downtown it would be more difficult for things like that.”
1736	Do you know about them?
1737	Do you know the cat at the dinner table that’s really confused?
1738	Do you really want to put your money into two corporations that lied about the safety of their products for more than 40 years and continue to produce BIOCIDES for agriculture; chemicals that are weapons of war and kill all life?
1739	Do you support this proposal?
1740	Dozens of civilians have been killed in the operation so far and at least 160,000 have fled the area, according to the UN.
1741	Dozens of people turned out Wednesday morning both in protest and in support of a proposed homeless housing development in Chatsworth.
1742	Drain on a paper towel and serve warm.
1743	Drake has played Marist who also sits at 2-2 in conference, but the Marist offense is stagnant, scoring the second-fewest points against conference opponents with 77. Only 1-3 (conf.) Valparaiso has scored less against PFL rivals (70 points).
1744	Dramatic lightning strikes, cute bear cubs and haunting.
1745	Drawing on a trove of documents and forensic financial analysis, the report sheds new light on the scale of corruption in South Sudan, an oil-rich country that has been in civil conflict for over five years.
1746	Dr. Cammer, who maintained a pri vate practice until he became ill, was president at the time of his death of the International Psychiatric Association for the Advancement of Electrotherapy, which he had been instrumental in founding.
1747	Dr. Frederick Yao Mac-Palm owner of Cidatel Hospital Hospital and his two accomplices – Mr. Ezor Kafui (a local weapon manufacturer) and Mr. Bright Allan Debrah Ofosu (aka BB or ADC) – are currently in the custody of the BNI over the alleged plot.
1748	Dr. Greg German, infectious disease consultant for Health PEI, says he wants to track where Islanders are picking up the ticks and what percentage of them test positive for Lyme disease.
1749	D. R. Horton Inc has a 12-month low of $32.39 and a 12-month high of $47.00.
1750	Drivers can qualify for several discounts.
1751	Drizzle 3-4 tablespoons of egg mixture into seasoned flour, mixing with fingers until it resembles wet sand.
1752	Drizzle two bar spoons of honey sweetener in the cup, followed by two ounces of Woodford Reserve Straight Bourbon, mixing the ingredients together.
1753	Dr. Josh Axe is the founder of Exodus Health Center, one of the largest wellness clinics in the United States.
1754	Dr Lown's success in medicine is key and would be used to redefine practices even today, said Dr John Rohde, a former Lown Scholar and Visiting Professor, as he delivered a keynote speech during the meeting.
1755	“Drone technology has also been introduced into the system to help deliver essential medicines, blood and blood products to remote communities.
1756	Drops in sentiment can be thought of as decreases in optimism and increases in pessimism inherent in management’s forward-looking statements.
1757	Dr. Owusu Afriyie Akoto, the Minister of Food and Agriculture, Mr. Kwaku Agyemang-Manu, the Minister of Health and MP for Dormaa Central took turns to respond to issues in relation to their respective sectors.
1758	Dr Patel told the inquest he was following generic advice from Slough-based Turning Point, an alcohol management team, which he conveyed to Mr Appleton, who seemed to agree, though he admitted his partner did not.
1759	Dr Rainer Kahrmann died suddenly in 2014, having fathered four children by two women, his Swiss socialite wife Christiane De Muller, and his girlfriend in later years, former model Hilary Harrison-Morgan, 60.
1760	Dr Tayo Haastrup, Chairman, Nigerian Institute of Public Relations (NIPR), FCT Chapter, says leadership failure is the major cause of the country’s underdevelopment.
1761	Drugs called carbapenems are used when an infection cannot be treated with anything else.
1762	D.S.A. still borrows meeting space from some unions.
1763	D., she joined the Clinton administration and worked at the State Department as a 30-something “with a baby on my hip.”
1764	DSP Garrick gave further details on how the system was used to assist.
1765	D. students will enrich the research that faculty within the department are able to conduct, according to Behn, who said he’s excited about the opportunity to get students involved.
1766	Dubow’s motion wouldn’t force officials to take the bus, but he argues pledging to do so would show the public that elected officials genuinely care about service quality.
1767	Duchess shares a family photo that 'makes her feel good' as she meets primary school pupils for.
1768	Dudley Rich Davis represented the entity previously.
1769	Due to the explosions, fire crews carried out a defense attack on the fire.
1770	Due to their size, they are seen as way too vulnerable to be in an animal shelter.
1771	Due to this delay, actors have have been rehearsing late into the nights.
1772	Durham University’s policy states that non-attendance and unsatisfactory performance should often be met with a “mixture of approaches”, combining “support with firmness”, and cites “laziness” as a reason for why students may be disengaging.
1773	“During a joint press conference with his Armenian counterpart, Zohrab Mnatsakanian, Lavrov also spoke about the mission of Russia and Armenia in protecting the Christian population of Syria.
1774	During April Unit Training Assembly members from the 162nd Operational Support Squadron learn about the B-17 Flying Fortress at the 390th Memorial Museum at the Pima Air and Space Museum.
1775	During Hammock’s first season in 2014, Hammock helped revitalize the Ravens run game that had finished 30th in the NFL the prior season.
1776	During her childhood years Alta’s family moved several times in the mid Missouri area where she attended country schools.
1777	During his visit, Rijiju met athletes from various sporting disciplines like volleyball, boxing, athletics, weightlifting and spoke to them and their coaches at length.
1778	During one July protest, while police detained more than 1,000 people, Putin wasn’t even on land — he was underwater, diving to the bottom of the Gulf of Finland to honour a sunken World War II submarine.
1779	During our first Christmas here, I got a bit over-excited and stuffed a 12ft tree into the car with no thought to the practicalities as I drove home very slowly with it hanging out of the boot.
1780	During that conversation, Ramsey said, he shared that he “had no awareness of Joe Wiseman until I read news reports about him” in connection with the Buncombe corruption scandal.
1781	During that interview, Gucci claimed that Angela tried to have sex with him.
1782	During the 2018 election cycle, he received at least $170,000, despite trouncing his Republican opponent in his safely Democratic district.
1783	During the 2018 Thanksgiving holiday, DPS Troopers issued more than 74,000 traffic citations and warnings, including 956 seat belt and child safety restraint citations.
1784	During the camp, children ride adapted bikes, which are provided by iCan Shine, for a 75-minute interval at the same time every day.
1785	During the early 1990s, Dane Whitman was involved in a complicated love triangle with Crystal of the Inhumans and Sersi of the Eternals.
1786	During the first six months of 2019, the share of local payment systems had significant growth from 0.7 to 7.5 percent year-on-year (yoy) and 476 billion tenge (US$1.23 billion), a 23-time increase.
1787	During the game itself, quarterback Dak Prescott lost one of his most reliable weapons when wide receiver Amari Cooper exited the game with a quad injury.
1788	During the heat of the day, when ungulates bed down in whatever shade can be found in the brush, the three dogs take their guard stations in regal repose, resembling a small pride of lions who have just gorged on a water buffalo.
1789	During the hour-plus oral history, Wright shares a variety of recollections related to her family’s history, her professional life as an educator and her experience of church today.
1790	During the last seven days, Bolivarcoin has traded 3.9% lower against the US dollar.
1791	During the last seven days, GMB has traded 7.4% higher against the US dollar.
1792	During the last seven days, Xuez has traded down 10.8% against the U.S. dollar.
1793	During the last week, CommerceBlock has traded up 9.1% against the dollar.
1794	During the last week, Stellite has traded down 5.7% against the dollar.
1795	During the opening number of Beauty and the Beast, it is made clear that Belle is the outcast of her French village.
1796	During the same period in the prior year, the firm posted $34.43 EPS.
1797	During the same quarter in the previous year, the business posted $0.54 EPS.
1798	During the same quarter last year, the firm posted $1.79 earnings per share.
1799	During the second Belt and Road Forum held in Beijing in late April, China handed over a feasibility report on the Muse-Mandalay Railway project to Myanmar’s Minister for Transport and Communications U Thant Sin Maung.
1800	During the West African Ebola outbreak, the worst the world has ever seen, in which more than 11,000 people died, the Canadian government ran a “Join the Fight Against Ebola” campaign, encouraging health professionals to travel to West Africa.
1801	Dushyant Vasavada, the chief conservator of forests of Junagadh wildlife circle, said that the forest department had taken cognisance of the incident.
1802	Dustin Johnson, the world’s second-ranked golfer, and Ian Poulter were two strokes behind the leaders.
1803	Dwayne Jones, 34, is said to have died in a fire in Gary Friday afternoon.
1804	Dwight operating a flight simulator at Edwards.
1805	D., would continue to provide overall leadership until Jan.
1806	Dynatrace, Inc provides a software intelligence platform for the enterprise cloud applications.
1807	Dyson is mostly known as a prominent manufacturer of vacuum cleaners and hand dryers, and that’s…
1808	Each faculty has a designated advisor in the co-op education department, responsible for helping students of that faculty.
1809	Each has signed a voluntary declaration that they’ve decided not to have children while the political will to tackle climate change continues to languish.
1810	Each participant was required to raise a $1,000 a minimum for the Habitat for Humanity charity.
1811	Each team has won all five of its games in France heading into Tuesday’s World Cup semifinal in Lyon.
1812	E-Active Body Control, powered in part by the 48V battery system used for EQ Boost, can adjust spring and damping forces for each wheel individually, working with the air suspension.
1813	Eagle Butte High School Talons intermediate girls' runner Josie Drefs makes her way through the course during the South Zone Championship at Echo Dale Regional Park on Oct. 9. Drefs earned one of 18 in spots in the category for provincials this Saturday.
1814	Earlier Friday, five other Cubs players received settlements from the team, meaning that no Cubs players will have to exchange arbitration numbers with the club.
1815	Earlier, Hard Kaur had revealed that supporters of Bharatiya Janta Party (BJP) and Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) were giving life threats to her for speaking against Indian government following Kashmir move.
1816	Earlier in the drive, backup back Sheldon Evans gained 18 yards on a hook-and-ladder play for a first down at the 48. Marshall ran out the final 5-plus minutes.
1817	Earlier on Tuesday, the Prime Minister told a parliament debate that he will pull the Brexit bill and push for an election if it is voted down by lawmakers.
1818	Earlier, Raut said his party was firm on a written assurance from the senior alliance partner over power sharing, including rotation of the chief minister's post for two-and-a-half years.
1819	Earlier, Sanoj Raj who became the first contestant to face the question of the jackpot Rs 7 crore level, decided to quit at Rs 1 crore.
1820	Earlier this month, Amgen said AMG510 shrank tumors in about half of advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients in the trial.
1821	Earlier this month, Madison got her fans excited again by releasing some new music that is already getting rave reviews.
1822	Earlier this week Spotify revealed the most-streamed musicians of the decade, with audiences listening to Drake more than any other artist.
1823	Earlier this year, a new study, published in The Lancet medical journal, suggested the risk of users contracting breast cancer could be double what was previously thought.
1824	Earlier today forecasters predicted that southern England could see the hottest day of the year so far today with temperatures expected to reach 84.2F.
1825	Earlier today, Theresa May’s divided cabinet agreed that Brexit talks with Labour should continue, but set a fresh deadline of the summer recess for parliament to pass the necessary legislation to take Britain out of the EU.
1826	Earlier today, the Selangor Raja Muda’s office denied that Tengku Amir was part of the event and said his photographs had been used without the consent of the palace.
1827	"Early introduction of any type of substance, specifically marijuana, has been linked with adverse mental health issues later on in life, as well as physical health issues," Chintoh-Silva said.
1828	Early Monday, five board members released an opinion editorial in the Raleigh News and Observer, defending the deal with SCV.
1829	Earnings results continue to come in mixed.
1830	Easier event creation straight from the Calendar flyout on the Taskbar.
1831	Easton was drafted in the fifth round this past weekend as the 166th overall pick and will be playing for the Los Angeles Chargers.
1832	Eating two to 3 meals daily will nonetheless provide many of the specific same advantages.
1833	Ebola Operations Resume in DRC's North Kivu Province (Today) - Ebola control operations have been restored in Democratic Republic of Congo's conflict-ridden North Kivu province,.
1834	E-cigarette users can also choose the CBD e-liquid option, thus efficiently controlling the dosage that suits them best.
1835	Ecuador’s economy depends heavily on oil exports, but revenues have fallen in recent years because of lower prices on the international market, leaving the country with mounting debt.
1836	Ed Buck appears in a Los Angeles Superior County courtroom in downtown L.A. to face charges accusing him of providing meth to a man who overdosed in Buck’s West Hollywood apartment.
1837	Edgartown; DOB 11/12/46, uninsured motor vehicle: to be dismissed upon payment of $100 court cost; unregistered motor vehicle: not responsible.
1838	Edgell, will oversee TMC’s technical vision; leading all aspects of the company’s technology-based activities into the corporate strategy.
1839	Edinburgh accounted for 64% of all such deals in Scotland over the period.
1840	Edinburgh’s economy is more reliant on financial services than even the London.
1841	Edison could be trying.
1842	Edison has targeted locations that the company predicts will be in need of protection in the next several months.
1843	Editor’s Note: Dana Point Times will be spotlighting artists based in Dana Point or whose work is featured in the community.
1844	Ed’s gambling habit isn’t the only secret the newest family on the cobbles in hiding.
1845	Eduardo Smith, an official from the British embassy in Guatemala, said a representative was due to travel to the area today.
1846	Education is the third piece of Barrett's agenda.
1847	Ed will make a record and we'll just push, push, push and the last three weeks of recording we've done, the bangers just come flying out."
1848	Egypt seeks excellence in higher education and scientific research, he said, adding his country was aiming to be one of the best 30 economies globally by 2030.
1849	Eight Democratic US senators signed letters to chief executives of major tech firms on Friday demanding they halt sales of gun accessories on their sites.
1850	Eighteen countries are expected to participate, with exercise activities occurring across 10 countries.
1851	Eighteen-year-old Kirsten Dickinson, who will be voting for the first time, said many of the youth would rather not vote at all, as opposed to voting for minority parties.
1852	Eight months prior to General Schoomaker finalizing the Soldier’s Creed, the United States illegally invaded Iraq after lying to the world about the presence of weapons of mass destruction and using the unrelated terrorist attacks on 9/11 as a pretext.
1853	Either way, simple to do.
1854	Either way, you will suffer more by not embracing both as part of our human experience.
1855	Eklund also recorded a single and scored three times for Wayne Trace.
1856	“Elderly individuals, people who have underlying health conditions, the very young.
1857	Eleanor, well-known to TV audiences through her appearances on ‘Irish Pictorial Weekly’, ‘Bridget and Eamon’ and ‘The Savage Eye’, said her show reflects on what happens when one isn’t willing to “give everything in the name of success”.
1858	Election Day was not the only day to vote.
1859	Electoral authorities of the territory highlighted the quality of the vote since 96.74 percent of the ballots were valid, and 3.26 were blank or null, which is considered a better result as compared with previous elections.
1860	Elevate Credit (NYSE:ELVT) last issued its earnings results on Monday, July 29th.
1861	Elevate Credit presently has a consensus price target of $6.50, suggesting a potential upside of 36.27%.
1862	Eleven equities research analysts have rated the stock with a hold rating and five have given a buy rating to the company’s stock.
1863	Elina Ribakova, deputy chief economist at the Institute of International Finance, described Russia's offerings as "no strings attached".
1864	Eliud Kipchoge of Kenya ran the second-fastest time ever to win the London Marathon for a record fourth time Sunday, and compatriot Brigid Kosgei swept to victory by almost two minutes in the women’s race.
1865	Elizabeth Banks, directing for the second time after 2015’s.
1866	Elizabeth Warren will be the only one of the top polling Democratic candidates on the debate stage Wednesday night, giving her a chance to showcase her mastery of policy details without her main competitors available for rebuttal.
1867	Elk Grove Village generated headlines across the country when it became the first non-tourist municipality to sponsor a bowl, but the agreement with Love’s was beyond even the considerable imagination of Mayor Craig Johnson.
1868	Elk Valley RCMP are looking for two suspects following a pair of bicycle thefts in the Elk Valley.
1869	Ellen’s son Stewart E. Mentz will officiate services.
1870	"Elliott is a renowned and dedicated sports journalist, who loves telling stories of athletes and people in Minnesota," said Kelly Boldan, Tribune editor.
1871	Elsewhere in the conversation, when asked about the "modern take on old-school soul" that many critics have deemed "Camouflage Hat," the musician talked a little bit about his influences.
1872	Elsewhere the approach to account sharing differs all across the board.
1873	Elves also practice eugenics and treat most of their population as equal-but-lesser.
1874	Email “Irish users urged to download latest version of WhatsApp after phones infected with spyware through missed calls”.
1875	Email “Ministers to order State bodies to decarbonise under new Climate Action Plan”.
1876	Email “Years of mistakes: How the Department of Social Protection mishandled social welfare overpayments”.
1877	EMB represents the Muslim community in Belgium.
1878	Emergency responders gave the person medical aid on scene.
1879	Emergency services were called to the Royal Mail delivery centre in Wellington Circle just after 6.30pm yesterday.
1880	Emma has no time for such interpretations.
1881	Emma Stone and boyfriend Dave McCary are officially engaged!
1882	Emma Weymouth - 33/1 is an English chef, model and philanthropist, who is a brand ambassador for Fiorucci.
1883	Emotion will fuel Sun’s Thomas in her Finals battle vs. Della.
1884	Employs fat because perfect electricity of vitality to youpersonally.
1885	Endeavour Silver has a twelve month low of $1.68 and a twelve month high of $3.20.
1886	"Endgame" adds "unfinished delete scene"
1887	England can qualify for Euro 2020 with a win over the Czechs at the Sinobo Stadium on Friday.
1888	England’s Jonny Bairstow scored 128 as they got off to a flying start in their win against Pakistan at Bristol.
1889	English becomes the lingua franca for the Israeli townsfolk and the visiting Egyptian orchestra to converse.
1890	Enlist a reading from one of our gifted psychics, tarot or palm readers.
1891	Ensuring Persian Gulf security endogenous in HOPE initiative : gov.
1892	Enterprises are transitioning all users, applications, and data located on-premise, to a heavy reliance on the cloud, edge applications, and a dispersed mobile workforce.
1893	Entertainment is a huge money-spinner in America.
1894	Enzo knew what it means not to have that limb but —unlike the young Jedi— he did not have his hand sliced off by a lightsaber, since he was born without his right hand.
1895	Enzymatic Clarifying Lotion is a gentle exfoliant that helps rid the skin of everything that dulls the complexion.
1896	Eohoi, also the Registrar Institute of Finance and Control of Nigeria (IFCN) said this while speaking with the News Agency of Nigeria (NAN) in Abuja on Tuesday.
1897	Episode VIII didn't really derail anything that we were thinking about."
1898	Eppler shared the contents of a text message he received from Callaway: “Shohei looked pretty darn good today.
1899	Epstein appeared in a Manhattan courtroom on Monday and pleaded not guilty to the charges, which carry a maximum of 45 years in prison.
1900	Epstein’s will has an “urgent need” for this master, who would “assist in settling claims against the Estate … with the goal of ensuring the timely approval of any resolution,” the filing continues.
1901	Equally as egregious is what’s missing from Congress’ spending bill.
1902	Equatorial Guinea is the world’s longest current serving male president ever.
1903	Equities analysts forecast that Honeywell International Inc. (NYSE:HON) will post $2.01 earnings per share (EPS) for the current fiscal quarter, Zacks Investment Research reports.
1904	Equities research analysts expect Dillard’s, Inc. (NYSE:DDS) to report $2.75 earnings per share for the current quarter, according to Zacks Investment Research.
1905	Erik Brunetti wants to be scandalous.
1906	ESIKHALENI police are looking for the relatives of a woman who was killed in a hit-and-run incident at the eSikhaleni off-ramp on the N2.
1907	ESPNcricinfo reported yesterday that Birmingham Phoenix will be coached by Andrew McDonald, the former Australia all-rounder who won the Big Bash this year with Melbourne Renegades, who will be assisted by Daniel Vettori.
1908	ESPN FC's Gab Marcotti does not hold back at criticizing Juventus' recent form, which culminated in a "cynical" display against Atletico Madrid.
1909	Essendon’s two key forwards, Shaun McKernan and Mitch Brown, are role players who need to be able to keep McGovern and Barrass honest.
1910	Established in 1973, Osoyoos Golf Club expanded to a 36-hole layout in 2006.
1911	Esther shot exclusively for Stella, she wears: quilted coat, £1,014, Zero + Maria Cornejo.
1912	Estonia will earmark up 95 personnel towards the UN peacekeeping mission and the EU Training Mission in Mali, it is reported.
1913	Ethan was raised in Maine, Manhattan, and Mendocino, California.
1914	Ethereum (ETH) traded down 0.9% against the dollar and now trades at $140.65 or 0.03494808 BTC.
1915	EU foreign policy has always been much less effective in dealing with malevolent powers and President Trump’s tough stance deserves fuller support.
1916	Eugene Swight, 13, takes a leap from the rocks near the Medical Lake boat launch on Thursday Aug. 8. Despite an unseasonably cool July, temperatures reached the mid-90s that day.
1917	EU MPs visiting Dal lake in Srinagar on Tuesday.
1918	“European farmers are watching us very closely,” he told his colleagues.
1919	Eva Longoria, America Ferrera, Constance Wu Step Out for ACLU's Bill Of Rights Dinner!
1920	Evaluating the missions, he said, "We think that the launching of the peace drive was successful.
1921	“Evan’s a liberal on this issue,’’ someone said.
1922	Even a wittness to such a situation, not usually confronted with serious stress, could have the same naturally occurring reaction.
1923	Even “experts” in periodization, that is, dividing a subject into historical eras for analysis, disagree on when Generation Z began or when the Millennial era ended.
1924	Even ExxonMobil, arguably the most environmentally unfriendly corporation of all time, claims, “We believe that climate change risks warrant action and it’s going to take all of us—business, governments and consumers—to make meaningful progress.”
1925	Even for those who have only become recent holders of the Dangote Cement stock, they would also not be left out of the celebrations.
1926	“Even if it’s a momentary lapse in communication, we want to make sure we don’t misinterpret that individual’s behavior as being resistant or uncooperative,” said Maglione.
1927	Even in the glorious age of white hair and senior citizen benefits, their inner children are not only alive and well, but they’re also shaking things up to… literally.
1928	Even people who grew up with gaming understand the activity much differently than those who treat it as a competition.
1929	Even she sounds forgiving.
1930	Even so, Horowitz also repeatedly noted under questioning from Democrats that he had not found that the FBI had targeted Trump for investigation for political reasons.
1931	Even still, everything they need to make a run in the playoffs remains in front of them in a division that has the 2-4 Giants one game out of first place.
1932	Even the interim city manager calls it “drastic.”
1933	Even the writer of the HBO Chernobyl miniseries responded on Twitter to the op-ed article: “It is not Chernobyl.
1934	Even though Lam announced the withdrawal of the bill, it is suspected that it is the Chinese government using Lam as a mouthpiece.
1935	Even though some of these hosts are not always there in good faith, I think a lot of people tune into this network in good faith.
1936	Even though the Minister acknowledged that some institutions were living up to their corporate social responsibilities in the various communities they operated, she charged them to do more to better the living standards of the people of the Region.
1937	Even though then you would have felt ugly, you look back and you’re like, “Oh, I looked so good!”
1938	Even though there are risks with both, I’m sure that risk from batteries is going to be easier to mitigate in the long run.
1939	Eventually she’d love to direct a movie in the vein of her favourite filmmaker John Hughes.
1940	Eventually, the sisters would accept the massive changes in Denver and return.
1941	Even was reportedly unhappy at being dropped in the middle of the England series with rookie Prithvi Shaw coming in.
1942	Even when budgets for those community facilities got cut deeply, funding for nursing homes went up.
1943	Even when partisan affiliations were included, the solid concern for this unsustainable financial burden held strong: 74% of Republicans, 80% of independents, and 90% of Democrats.
1944	Even with its abbreviated length, there is plenty to chew on, both sonically and conceptually.
1945	Even without Stanton, the Yankees had plenty of firepower for their battle against Verlander, one of the best pitchers in baseball.
1946	Eve offers several other smart home devices within its portfolio too, including door and window sensors and a door lock, among other things, all of which are HomeKit compatible.
1947	Everitt says many home owners also worry that after spending all that time and money, they might not get what they had in mind and will have to live with the disappointing results.
1948	"Every address I've ever had since I was 10, we've had to leave for the same thing," Bryan Song resident Jada Wooten said Monday.
1949	Everybody felt better about the way we played.”
1950	Everybody is out and it’s a great time to get people into the station and check out what we have,” remarked Fire Captain Jamie Desautels.
1951	Everybody knows the Peanuts gang.
1952	'Everybody wanted these images.
1953	“Every country that has an interest in ensuring that those waterways are open and crude oil and other products can flow through the Strait of Hormuz needs to participate,” Pompeo said.
1954	"Every cow I spoke to said the same thing: 'Boo.'
1955	“Every day we come in to work, we are making the world a worse place.
1956	Every movie from has the sequence in which the person trains / works out to try and pursue the dream.
1957	“Everyone here does meth,” said Tyrone Hart, 56, who has lived along the river for decades and calls himself Garland’s best friend.
1958	“Everyone is welcome to explore the areas along the Brunei River, including those who are interested in conducting research and educational activities on our rich and humble history.”
1959	"Everyone who rides a bike around this city knows that any time you're around a police station, a firehouse, basically any government building, you're dealing with cars on the sidewalk and in bike lanes," said Tomac, a Bay Ridge resident.
1960	Every photo shows a certain field of view.
1961	Every pool of drinkable water matters.
1962	Every seminarian has his own living space with room still for those to come.
1963	Every single thing has to maintain their shape to develop outcomes that are authentic the end solution is excellent for usage from the laboratory.
1964	"Every single time they come forward, someone leaps up and puts the blowtorch on them.
1965	Every smart thermostat has one.
1966	Everything was seemingly going fine between the Boston Red Sox and Tampa Bay Rays Wednesday afternoon.
1967	Everything you need to know about ‘I Am the Night’
1968	Every upholstery seems worth what Chevy charges for it though, be it the utilitarian base fabric or soft optional leather.
1969	Every week we have a plan.”
1970	Every woman in this country has a hundred owners.
1971	Evidence has been compiled that shows residential school children faced a grave risk of death.
1972	Evidently, both the number of IED incidents and related fatalities have come down since Basavaraj took over the mantle.
1973	Evita Caldwell, a public information officer for the St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department, told ABC News the information on the department’s officers in the project had been sent to the department’s Internal Affairs Division for review.
1974	Evoke Pharma Inc (NASDAQ:EVOK) saw a significant increase in short interest in the month of August.
1975	Ewan Reid is the president and CEO of Mission Control Space Services Inc.
1976	Ewart said she was refused advice on how to seek a termination, and that her medical records were not sent to the clinic.
1977	"Examples of foods we should limit include takeaways, crisps, savoury snacks, sugary and chocolate confectionery, cakes, biscuits, pastries, ice cream, and sugary soft drinks."
1978	Except for limited quarterly payments in 2014 and 2016, Stuchkus did not deposit withheld payroll taxes to the IRS, the information alleged.
1979	EXCLUSIVE: Jussie Smollett appeared in a play about a biracial, gay sports star who endures attacks similar to his just HOURS before his 'assault'
1980	Existing and new Huawei phones will be hurt the most when it comes to security updates.
1981	Exiting the EU Committee Issues its 15 Tests for Brexit!
1982	Expect a learning curve, but don’t sit passively through the interim period, or else the adoption phase may never end.
1983	Expectations are at their highest in years in Cleveland, and that has been reflected not only in ticket prices but also with how Las Vegas gamblers are backing the Browns.
1984	Expectations that offshore wind projects will fundamentally reshape power markets.
1985	Exposure therapy is a common treatment for phobias, where you sit with your fear in order to help you overcome it.
1986	Exquisitely tender, flavorful greens will soon be on the scene.
1987	Extinction Rebellion’s German branch responded with to Hallam’s comments.
1988	“Extremely brazen attack that we’ve seen here this afternoon,” said Const.
1989	Extremely grateful to RSVP and Sneha for giving me this opportunity, their level of dedication and enthusiasm towards the movie is incredible and I can't wait to begin this exciting journey."
1990	Extreme situations can cause mass chaos, and it often becomes more dangerous and stressful than it needs to be.
1991	Eye conditions that can cause vision impairment and blindness – such as cataract, trachoma and refractive error – are the main focus of national prevention and other eye care strategies.
1992	Eyeing an early 2020 release, the film stars breakout Geetanjali Thapa, Olivia DeJonge (Netflix’s “The Society”), Robert Aramayo (young Eddard Stark on “Game of Thrones”) and Cynthia Nixon.
1993	Eye Radio staff helping out a patient wounded by gunshots at the Juba Teaching Hospital in 2014.
1994	Facebook has been working on a new private messaging app for Instagram, according to a report by The Verge.
1995	“Facebook is a conservative outlet,” Adam Serwer, a journalist at The Atlantic, last week.
1996	Facebook is calling for advertisers to increase “liquidity (flexibility) by removing constraints” on their campaigns.
1997	Faculty, especially FSW faculty, made announcements in their classes, and people posted the request to vote on their social media.
1998	Failing a midterm will never feel particularly good.
1999	Fairen-Jimenez believes they will be able to increase the efficacy of the system and the next steps will be to apply the platform to genes involved in causing so-called hard-to-treat cancers.
2000	“Faith communities’ resources are rarely directed toward protest action, and when they are it tends to be for movements opposed to issues central to the Women’s March, such as reproductive or LGBTQIA rights,” Beyerlein and co-authors note.
2001	Falana added that if the minister failed or refused to accede to his request, he shall be compelled to apply to the Federal High Court to direct him to avail him with the information on the loss of the oil revenue of $60 billion.
2002	Fall harvest is underway here in the Tri-State, and you want to make sure you are aware of a few safety hazards for the safety of farmers as well as motorists.
2003	Fallon played hype man with a tambourine, encouraging the crowd to clap along as dozens of subway patrons quickly ran over to join the crowd.
2004	Fallon Sherrock's fairytale run at the PDC World Championship came to an end in the third round as she fell to a 4-2 defeat to 22nd seed Chris Dobey at a raucous Alexandra Palace.
2005	Family and friends may share memories, prayers and photos with the family at www.kranzfuneralhome.com.
2006	Family will receive friends on Friday February 22nd from 10-11 AM at the Fowler Funeral Home Inc. 340 West Ave., Brockport, where his Funeral Service will follow at 11 AM.
2007	Famodun cited the case of the former Secretary to the State Government, Alhaji Moshood Adeoti, who contested the governorship seat alongside Oyetola on the platform of ADP, saying the move was efforts in futility.
2008	Famuyiwa’s use of wipes kept the pace up and dragged you from moment to moment when he played fast and loose with the timing of events.
2009	Fans are on Keith’s side, it seems, as Iris’s refusal to finish the sexy dice game exploited her lack of sexual knowledge.
2010	Fans either love it or hate everything about it and have declared Johnson to have ruined the entire franchise.
2011	Fans finally got to see some and a quick surprise appearance by Ewan McGregor who will reprise his role as Obi-Wan in a series.
2012	Fans greeted the Golden State Warriors returning to the Bay Area after winning the 1975 N.B.A. championship.
2013	Fans have also flocked to the brand's Instagram page to urge them to restock, as certain sizes are currently sold out.
2014	Fans will flock to the stadiums and tune into their television sets to watch at work with the bat or terrorising opponents with the ball.
2015	Fans will obsessively pick apart this first episodein the coming days, but has always been at its best when it's welcoming to even the most casual audiences.
2016	Farber has an armed guard keeping watch at her apartment, Dulos claimed.
2017	FARC’s Londoño calls on party to “mark distance” with Márquez.
2018	Far from being a tool of political corruption, the Civil Service was created to be an antidote to the very kind of corruption and self-dealing that seems to plague this administration.
2019	Fast bowler Hazlewood took 5-30 in an England innings that was wrapped up inside 28 overs.
2020	Fast-forwarding a little, Parker said EforAll helped her move the flan operation out of her home and into a commercial bakery that she now owns by helping her secure a loan.
2021	Father Pavlak said his name has been used to scam people.
2022	Father reunites with son in Kuwait while deployed, must comply with the restrictions shown on https://www.
2023	Father Scott preached using the spirituality of his congregation: to live and grow in our “sonship” with Jesus the Son into the family of the Holy Trinity.
2024	Fatimah, from Surabaya, Indonesia, can earn up to RM600 selling banana fritters and spring rolls.
2025	Fears about troubling videos and excessive screen time are legitimate.
2026	Federal Pell Grants combined with State Programs such as Lottery Tuition Assistance, Life Scholarship, SC Promise, and other local scholarships lighten the financial burden of college, making it more affordable for NETC students.
2027	Federation recap: 10,800 attended, Coalition grossed $40,000 food, etc.
2028	Federer, the oldest man in the field at 38, was beaten by the youngest as Tsitsipas swept into the final 6-3, 6-4.
2029	Feedback on “Belfast court says it can't rule on no-deal Brexit case as it 'belongs to the world of politics'”.
2030	Fehler said he hopes to bring the Fort Winter Drift Festival back for a fifth time.
2031	Felix Agyemang(Ghana) From University Of Cambridge.
2032	Fellow Korea-based artist Blackpink finished third with 3.9 million, followed by Ariana Grande, Cardi B and 5 Seconds of Summer.
2033	“Fellow Nigerians, we can only stand a chance to win the fight against Corruption, and position our dear nation for accelerated development when we stand together to contend against it.”
2034	Fellowships to continue his coral studies followed at the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology and then at UMiami again.
2035	Felt my house shifting like it does during an earthquake when the tornado came through Sapulpa.
2036	Female masters that did so were rewarded with various accolades, such as receiving financial benefits.
2037	Fentanyl was originally only supposed to be indicated for cancer patients and for “end-of-life” pain.
2038	Fenwick (8-1) travels to Wilmington next Tuesday.
2039	FENWICK ISLAND – With an engineering company now on board, a Fenwick Island committee last month evaluated the town’s next steps for securing a dredging project in the Little Assawoman Bay.
2040	Ferguson, of Michigan, had been a librarian for 31 years before her retirement in 2013.
2041	“Ferment” by Holly Davis is a guide to the ancient art of culturing foods from kombucha to sourdough.
2042	Fernandez names transition team; markets expecting economy names and policies — MercoPressGet our news on your inbox!
2043	Few people shared that money for personal gains, while thousands of Nigerians were dying.
2044	Few world leaders are more familiar with the risks of banking on the hope that a personal relationship with Trump will pay policy dividends than members of the G-7.
2045	Fiduciary Management Inc. WI now owns 671,263 shares of the industrial products company’s stock worth $49,848,000 after buying an additional 215,238 shares in the last quarter.
2046	FI Forums will also be conducted in Mayantoc, Tarlac; Las Nieves, Agusan del Norte; Claveria, Misamis Oriental, and Polillo Islands, Quezon.
2047	Fifty-seven of those positions are currently filled.
2048	File Photo of Parliament building.
2049	Fill lanterns with poinsettia and greens to hang on your porch.
2050	Film personalities took to Twitter to offer their condolences.
2051	Final approval has been received on all but one property sold in a tax sake held in July, according to Pulaski Finance Director Rebecca Leeper.
2052	Finally, Barclays set a €16.80 ($19.53) price objective on Deutsche Telekom and gave the stock a “neutral” rating in a research note on Tuesday, April 2nd.
2053	Finally, BidaskClub cut shares of Zai Lab from a “strong-buy” rating to a “buy” rating in a report on Friday.
2054	Finally, Creative Planning boosted its position in Arconic by 15.3% during the fourth quarter.
2055	Finally, DA Davidson boosted their price objective on Canada Goose from $42.00 to $48.00 and gave the stock a “buy” rating in a report on Thursday, August 15th.
2056	Finally, Dimensional Fund Advisors LP grew its position in shares of R1 RCM by 3.8% during the 2nd quarter.
2057	Finally, First Allied Advisory Services Inc. acquired a new stake in shares of Companhia Siderurgica Nacional in the 1st quarter valued at approximately $117,000.
2058	Finally, FMR LLC purchased a new stake in Onespan in the fourth quarter worth about $6,108,000.
2059	Finally, FMR LLC purchased a new stake in Texas Pacific Land Trust during the 4th quarter worth approximately $1,570,000.
2060	Finally, HC Wainwright reiterated a hold rating and issued a $1.50 price target on shares of Sunesis Pharmaceuticals in a report on Friday, August 9th.
2061	Finally, JPMorgan Chase & Co. increased their price target on Realty Income from $57.00 to $58.00 and gave the stock a “neutral” rating in a research note on Monday, September 17th.
2062	Finally, Legacy Advisors LLC purchased a new position in AMETEK in the second quarter valued at $55,000.
2063	Finally, Morgan Stanley boosted its position in ACCO Brands by 15.3% in the third quarter.
2064	Finally, Needham & Company LLC downgraded shares of Xilinx from a “buy” rating to a “hold” rating in a research report on Thursday, April 25th.
2065	Finally, Neuburgh Advisers LLC increased its holdings in Orthopediatrics by 125.0% during the 2nd quarter.
2066	Finally, Northwest Wealth Management LLC lifted its position in shares of SPDR S&P Dividend ETF by 86.8% in the first quarter.
2067	Finally, NumerixS Investment Technologies Inc bought a new stake in Uniqure in the 2nd quarter valued at about $125,000.
2068	Finally, one of their editors changed the tune being sung and about time!
2069	Finally, Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. increased its stake in shares of Pioneer Municipal High by 18.9% during the 1st quarter.
2070	Finally, Roth Capital set a $75.00 price target on shares of First Solar and gave the company a “buy” rating in a research report on Monday, April 22nd.
2071	Finally, Stratos Wealth Partners LTD. bought a new stake in Darden Restaurants in the 3rd quarter worth $149,000.
2072	Finally, Two Sigma Advisers LP raised its stake in Costco Wholesale by 120.7% in the fourth quarter.
2073	Finally, UBS Group raised their price objective on shares of Citigroup from $87.00 to $93.00 and gave the company a “buy” rating in a research report on Thursday, October 3rd.
2074	Finally, Uma Bharti returned to the party fold and Chouhan comfortably ruled till December 2018 before losing the last assembly election.
2075	Finally, upgraded Cushman & Wakefield from a “hold” rating to a “buy” rating in a research note on Tuesday, August 6th.
2076	Finally, Wolfe Research assumed coverage on shares of Cardinal Health in a research note on Tuesday, April 2nd.
2077	Finally, Wolfe Research started coverage on shares of Illumina in a research note on Thursday, May 30th.
2078	Finals take place from May 4 to May 10. To help students before and during the week, the University provides counseling and tutoring services.
2079	Financial Engines Advisors L.L.C. now owns 1,045,559 shares of the company’s stock valued at $60,474,000 after acquiring an additional 259,121 shares during the period.
2080	Find out how Hotseat contestant Abhishek fares in the game on pic.
2081	Find out what the hit's fans are saying about the song below.
2082	Find them in every nook and corner of this city.
2083	Fine, feel free to snicker.
2084	Firefighters started to take control on a destructive wildfire in Southern California farming region on Saturday, as they are taking advantage of lighter winds and evacuees are allowed to get home, officials said.
2085	Firoz’s grandfather was a bhajan singer who is known for his melodious voice singing hymns of Radha-Krishna and Sitaram in a temple here in Bagru.
2086	First, as the president should know after having launched this attack several times before, Blumenthal spent years in the Marine Corps Reserves, but he was not deployed overseas during the war in Vietnam.
2087	First, Aymann and Sammy talk about why so many men resist the urge to cry in the first place, and why relearning how to cry is so much harder than expected.
2088	First Financial Corp IN now owns 1,875 shares of the medical instruments supplier’s stock worth $124,000 after buying an additional 200 shares during the last quarter.
2089	First half — 1. Maren Friday (Tori Thorson), 13th; 2. Friday (Emilia McGiffert), 33rd.
2090	FirsTier operates branches in Colorado, Nebraska and Wyoming.
2091	Firstly, the remarkable lack of publicly expressed outrage by other trainers.
2092	Firstly, we want the international community to have a better understanding of how climate change exacerbates conflicts.
2093	First off should I watch Smackdown this week or not and why and secondly help me live in this PG world that is slowly eroding my love for pro wrestling away.
2094	First, the definition of "private interest" in the legislation excludes certain things — but notably not "political" interest.
2095	First, they were caught red-handed as shills for the fake Russian collusion narrative that convulsed the nation for nearly three years.
2096	First Trust Advisors LP now owns 220,631 shares of the basic materials company’s stock valued at $36,856,000 after acquiring an additional 33,431 shares during the last quarter.
2097	First up will be digitizing of the registration books from 1910-1914.
2098	FIS has been the topic of several analyst reports.
2099	Fit, sure, let him go for it.
2100	Five armed robberies were reported in August and September 2019 in Chatham and Grand Crossing on the South Side.
2101	Five Labour MPs voted for the agreement.
2102	Fiverr International had a negative return on equity of 26.60% and a negative net margin of 32.55%.
2103	Five years prior, Mia Farrow, ostensibly all-too-familiar with accused child predators, testified on Polanski’s behalf in a libel suit.
2104	“Fixing this particular problem introduces new, greater security risks, and so we have chosen to stick with the security afforded by high-level memory management, even if it means that we cannot clear memory instantly.
2105	Flag article New depot program gives separating recruits a “Fresh Start”
2106	Fleetwood’s duties may have increased throughout his tenure working for the Town of Berlin, but it’s something he said he continues to enjoy.
2107	Floor test should be conducted in 24 hrs.
2108	Florio has to throw some hate on the Cowboys even when he picks them to win.
2109	FLOW encourages parents, students and teachers to be on the lookout for another Sales academy recruitment session coming soon.
2110	Flower is a nine-month-old female.
2111	Floyd announced herself last year when she beat the boys with a seven-under-par 65 at the tough East Course to become the first girl to win on the Bridge Fund Managers Junior Series at Royal Kensington and Johannesburg Golf Club.
2112	Focusing on user experience and content quality is essential to ensuring AR success, Formella says.
2113	Focus on executing a proper learning and onboarding plan with frequent checkups and touchpoints to answer questions and ensure all features and functions are being used effectively.
2114	Following Cuomo’s announcement, rumors have been circulating that he may include full marijuana legalization in his forthcoming budget proposal.
2115	Following his freestyle over Schoolboy Q’ “Numb Numb Juice,” Rick Ross is back to teasing us with another purported Port of Miami 2 single titled “Big Tyme.”
2116	Following that, the company will make monthly payments of $2 million through March.
2117	Following the announcement Caroline would step down, fans took to social media in their drones to put Maya Jama forward for the job.
2118	Following the completion of the purchase, the director now owns 29,959 shares in the company, valued at $1,082,119.08.
2119	Following the completion of the transaction, the director now owns 18,992 shares in the company, valued at approximately $627,875.52.
2120	Following the completion of the transaction, the director now owns 24,500 shares of the company’s stock, valued at approximately $523,565.
2121	Following the sale, the insider now directly owns 55,743 shares of the company’s stock, valued at $8,930,586.03.
2122	Following the transaction, the insider now directly owns 120,102 shares of the company’s stock, valued at $9,201,014.22.
2123	Following the transaction, the insider now directly owns 1 shares of the company’s stock, valued at approximately $60.84.
2124	Following the transaction, the insider now directly owns 41,175 shares in the company, valued at approximately $2,202,039.
2125	Following Thursday's debate, Biden landed here for events at private homes in Sea Cliff, Belvedere, and Los Altos.
2126	Food Fare, which faced similar fines for defying the laws on Good Friday earlier this year, refused to give up the information.
2127	Footage shows Prince William struggling across the runway while holding four bags with his son George, six, and daughter Charlotte, four, in tow.
2128	Football became that beard.
2129	For 16 years she has been a saleswoman at an upper-end women’s clothing shop, and now she fears her job may be on the line.
2130	For 50 years, he has lived in Thurmont with his wife, Marie, and been a member of Post 168.
2131	For a console-like gaming experience, the smartphone features ultrasonic air triggers and additional side-mounted USB-C charging port for ease of charging in landscape orientation.
2132	For a good laugh, they named it after their longtime friend Dr. Robert Drewes, curator of herpetology emeritus at the California Academy of Sciences, who led their expedition in São Tomé.
2133	For Alabamians, the state’s STAR ID is compliant with all requirements of the federal law.
2134	For all the darkness and despair of The Handmaid’s Tale, The Testaments offers hope and a future, even if Atwood furnishes fictional and rather simple answers in a movie-like finish.
2135	“For a long time now, KCM has been claiming that it was making losses and was among other companies that have been trying to arm-twist government,” he said.
2136	“For a lot of people doing it tough, trust is a huge issue,” he said.
2137	“For a lot of the families coming in, it was their first interface with science, especially as a participant,” said Weiss, a fourth-year psychology Ph.
2138	For another, the inertia of sexual drought makes for more work — now you have to overcome heightened inhibitions or uncertainties in addition to the usual logistical and social maneuvering.
2139	For a quarter of a century after the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989 in Beijing, the party managed to avoid making a single major policy mistake that could destabilise the country.
2140	For a series to connect with the zeitgeist it has to have the whole package, and hypnotic main theme is arguably just as indelible as its performances and plot twists.
2141	For as much attention as Ohashi gets on floor exercise, she is also ranked second nationally on the balance beam and leads a Bruins squad that is the defending national champion and has lost only one meet this season.
2142	FORCE (FOR) traded flat against the dollar and now trades at $0.0003 or 0.00000004 BTC.
2143	For close to two years, Davis has been the TSCHR Assistant Command Fitness Coordinator (ACFL).
2144	Forde's key attribute at Pompey was his ability to dominate his area and collect crosses with authority.
2145	For dessert, try a slice of Fireman Derek's red velvet cake, served with a dollop of vanilla ice cream and a salted caramel drizzle.
2146	“Ford is going after a Conservative project — this is not something the Liberals did, this is a (former Progressive Conservative premiers) John Robarts and Bill Davis project.
2147	Foresight Wealth Management LLC grew its stake in shares of Illumina, Inc. (NASDAQ:ILMN) by 4.2% in the second quarter, according to its most recent filing with the SEC.
2148	For example, a declassified document from the CIA archives in the form of a letter from a CIA task force addressed to the Director of the CIA details the close relationship that exists between the CIA and mainstream media and academia.
2149	For example, fall and winter storms can quickly refill BC Hydro’s smaller reservoirs on Vancouver Island and in the Lower Mainland.
2150	“For example, if as a result of the poll, more than 30 percent of the locals believe that the akim (mayor) of a city or a village is ineffective, this is a reason for a special commission to be set up,” Tokayev said.
2151	For example, if you have a car loan or a mortgage, then you’re already using leverage.
2152	For example, Instagram said last week it is expanding its test to hide "likes" in more markets.
2153	For example, the freckles on blind Agnes' face sometimes appear like real eyes and the long hair that cover grandmother Sibilla's entire body occasionally takes a life of its own.
2154	For example: Trump pressured a foreign government to interfere in US elections by smearing an opponent, he should be removed from office.
2155	For example, you may be able to identify monthly bills that you could eliminate in an emergency such as digital television (DSTV) and costs towards your lawn (kapinga) care.
2156	For fans of music’s elite, the second half of 2019 welcomed a gold mine of page turners—autobiographies, memoirs and photo books offering a backstage pass into the life and gossip and relationships and failures of music’s greatest minds.
2157	For fans of the truly obscure, there’s a provision to exempt sugar beet trucks in rural Oregon from length limits.
2158	For funeral service details please contact Caladh Funeral Services on 01369 707000.
2159	Forget the fact that he has his own horse — and that is actually his horse in the movie.
2160	For her part, Gomez was nothing but positive on social media, uploading the collage that included her latest tattoo, but also posting several pictures from the red carpet, as well.
2161	For her part, Sawyer has accepted a series of open invitations that both Strickland and Herenton have eschewed.
2162	For her, the annual polo match is a great way to reunite with old friends from all different times in her life.
2163	For him, it was too radical.
2164	For his fans, unleashed a steady flow of previously unreleased songs, uploaded a lot of loosies to his SoundCloud page, and alerted his fans on social media.
2165	For instance, if you're someone who runs around all day without breathing deeply and holding tension in your stomach, neck and shoulders, then you're going to be physically stressed.
2166	For instance, in Chicago the government has put most of their busy roads in the hands of the private sector who built, operated and remitted a certain percentage to Chicago government.
2167	For instance, in political spheres, some African countries have heads of states who are kings.
2168	For Labour, the fact that the party includes both Brexiters and remainers could cause campaign problems and split voters.
2169	For launch though, Astro’s gone with.
2170	For Live Caption, Google plans to support more languages “.”
2171	For many companies, aligning recovery time and point objectives (RTOs/RPOs) is perceived as costly and unachievable for all.
2172	For many, Hank Williams is a country music legend.
2173	Formation required Aster to use counters, which can always get a little messy, but the slower pace of the game helped it a lot.
2174	For me, 4 years was all the time it took to soak up the message that fat was the worst thing that I could be.
2175	"For me it's really just about the interaction, and then if people want to take a picture, we do it and you know, and it's fun," said Harris.
2176	Former Big Brother Africa housemate, Tayo Faniran has called South African rapper, AKA out on social media accusing him of xenophobia.
2177	Former Houston police officers Steven Bryant, foreground, and Gerald Goines, background, turn themselves in at the Civil Courthouse, Friday, August 23, 2019, in Houston.
2178	Formerly a Meantime pub, The Old Brewery has changed hands, but the building has kept its charms.
2179	Former minister says he currently backs PM as Likud’s leader but ready for leadership contest; decries ‘efforts to delegitimize democratic competition in Likud’
2180	Former NFL quarterback adopted the keto diet back in 2012.
2181	Former President John Dramani Mahama was in church Sunday, November 24, at Adutor EP in South Tongu Constituency, Volta region.
2182	Former Rep. Mark Sanford told CNN's Brianna Keilar on "CNN Right Now" in July that he is considering mounting a challenge to Trump in 2020, with plans this month to explore a possible candidacy.
2183	Former superstar CM Punk will be a special guest host on WWE Backstage.
2184	Former US Congressman Anthony Weiner leaves Federal Court in New York on May 19, 2017.
2185	Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. at a Labor Day picnic in Cedar Rapids, Iowa.
2186	"For me, they can express whatever opinion they'd like," says Favreau, staking out the only reasonable position in this incredibly pointless and unresolvable debate — so can we all stop talking about this now?
2187	For more information about the Trainee Engineer Scheme visit openreach.
2188	For more information on Rohrbough’s campaign, visit electanna.
2189	For more information or for an absentee ballot contact League President Shannon Orlandini at 239-285-5015.
2190	For more information, visit www.westflorida.coop or follow us on Facebook (www.facebook.com/wfeca).
2191	For most people and stakeholders in a business, this largely goes unnoticed and is often relegated or delegated to more technical-minded individuals and departments.
2192	For my kids, Brexit is incomprehensible.”
2193	“For new students, we are designing these new courses and program changes to help them be successful, and to help them find the right lane,” Burton explained.
2194	For non-emergency cases, the study shows “there’s no need to rush” into invasive tests and procedures, said New York University’s Dr. Judith Hochman.
2195	For now, fans will just have to sit tight and wait to see where season 4 takes them (quite literally, now that several of the show's characters no longer live in Hawkins).
2196	For one thing, Fancher adjusted the trim wheel so that the plane naturally stayed level.
2197	For one thing, the now public whistleblower complaint makes it clear that the whistleblower’s information is second-hand.
2198	For Penn State the issue down the field has been a complicated one.
2199	For purchases made abroad and brought to Brazil in luggage, the current limit of US$ 500 will be maintained.
2200	For reference, 1 square mile is equal to 640 acres.
2201	For six consecutive seasons, the Patriots have had a swimmer in the pool on Saturday of the state finals.
2202	For some committed peace activists further to the left, the pairing of Meretz with Ehud Barak and Labor with Levi-Abekasis is pushing them to seriously contemplate voting for the Arab ticket for the first time.
2203	For some fans, it was what they were looking forward to most.
2204	For some reason, people can’t get enough of them — and for me that reason is cannabis.
2205	For state governments, this included lost sales tax and income tax revenue.
2206	For Texans star J.J. Watt, who grew up in Wisconsin, this week in Green Bay fulfills a childhood dream when he was rooting for the Packers, even if things don't go according to plan.
2207	For that reason, I can support the prime minister’s clear view that we must leave the on 31 October – with a deal or without one.
2208	For the amount of talent that Buttler has, to only get one century in 34 Tests isn't good enough.
2209	For the best moments to serve this salad, Freedman recommends richer meals that need a bright pick-me-up, in a similar spirit to the vinegary slaws that lift up the weight of barbecue.
2210	For the better part of five years we’ve bribed him with an iPad, cajoled him into opening his mouth, and put the spoon against his lips.
2211	For the Broncos, they have a total of seven players listed as questionable for Sunday’s game.
2212	For the Filipino-American chefs and restaurateurs now seeking out Ms. Fernandez’s works, it isn’t easy: They were published only in the Philippines and are almost entirely out of print.
2213	For the first ten minutes they seemed oddly reticent, unable to find the right pass to unlock Huddersfield’s determined, if limited, defence.
2214	“For the last 15 years, I’ve been obsessed with youth football, particularly in Scotland,” he said.
2215	For the last six years, United Power and Metro IAF affiliates have been organizing public-sector gun purchasers and gun industry investors through its “Do Not Stand Idly By” campaign.
2216	For the markets, the greater concern is on the success – or otherwise – of the Brexit negotiations.
2217	For them, fitness and exercise are believed to help slow any decline, keeping brain tissue and function relatively youthful.
2218	For the next fiscal year, analysts expect that the firm will post sales of $9.17 billion, with estimates ranging from $9.17 billion to $9.18 billion.
2219	For the past few weeks, doubts loomed over whether the elections would even take place.
2220	For the profession, as a beauty queen, I run programmes when I’m less busy.
2221	For the same investment it took all these stakeholders to get here, why wouldn’t they have addressed the real inequities, like fixing the SAT’s inherent biases or addressing a test-prep industry that institutionalizes the opportunity gap?
2222	For the sauce: Heat the reserved pomegranate mixture ( the marinade) with the reduced chicken stock and grated orange zest in small saucepan.
2223	For these reasons, researchers have suspected social networking sites to be an ideal breeding ground for narcissists from early on.
2224	For the Spartans (2-3), Pierce finished with 15 saves.
2225	For things like vitamin C and carotenoids which have been linked to mental health, ‘cooking and canning would most likely lead to a degradation in nutrients, thereby limiting their beneficial impact on mental health’.
2226	“For this there is no magic wand; this spiritual-pastoral fact cannot be denied.”
2227	For those of us who had spent our adult, working lives demanding full-disclosure from governments,…
2228	For those of you who want to compete with other writers and readers for bragging rights, join here!
2229	For those who have not ever created a condolence letter ahead to a superior method to commence is to decide to attempt to locate an example condolence letter that can let you comprehend the structure and the tone your letter needs to require.
2230	For three of us, with starters, mains and drinks (soft and alcoholic) it comes to £65, which I don’t feel is bad considering we all leave full.
2231	"For too many Māori and Pasifika students in particular, the extent and the depth of the racism, their word I might say not mine, that they experience would I think surprise many New Zealanders," he said.
2232	Fort St. John and Region is expected to see temperatures to remain warm throughout the remainder of March.
2233	Fortunately for him, Quirinus Quirrell comes along.
2234	Fortunately the cupboard is not bare for McCollum, who returns Dedmen, Stamps, as a core lineup to build on heading into 2019-20.
2235	Fort Washington Investment Advisors Inc. OH now owns 448,092 shares of the industrial products company’s stock valued at $71,623,000 after purchasing an additional 37,357 shares during the last quarter.
2236	Forty papers will be presented in thirteen sessions while 3,000 delegates will attend the event.
2237	“For us, it is huge playing our system, getting pucks in deep and making the opposing team work.
2238	“For us, it’s no longer about claiming the benefits, or even about winning,” said Li Jun, Zou’s lawyer.
2239	For Vineyard Coach Rocco Bellebuono, a time out late in the first half and a halftime chat seemed to bring some life to his offensively timid charges.
2240	For Ward, it's about building excitement before kick-off, not a lack of discipline.
2241	For years, rumours about the ghost, or ghosts, of Malaspina Theatre have been passed down like a tattered copy of ; but for the most part, the presence of Neil Rutherford (and others) has been a well-kept department secret.
2242	Foster parents play an important part in our network of support for vulnerable children.
2243	Four analysts have issued estimates for EPR Properties’ earnings.
2244	Four analysts have made estimates for RBC Bearings’ earnings, with the lowest sales estimate coming in at $182.55 million and the highest estimate coming in at $183.70 million.
2245	Four analysts have rated the stock with a hold rating and two have given a buy rating to the stock.
2246	Four more deaths occurred in September, followed by three in October and two in November.
2247	Four of those happened in Minnesota, all EF-0 or EF-1 in strength mainly with damage to trees, crops and a few farming structures.
2248	Four Thumbs Up: Tyson Fury and Otto Wallin are all smiles before their September 14 bout.
2249	Fourth we maintained our solid financial foundation by balancing our leverage, maintaining liquidity and improving our debt metrics from a cyclical trough.
2250	Four whales in total were in the group, including a cow and a calf.
2251	Four years later, the Trojans again are reeling after an overtime loss at BYU, amid questions about Helton’s future.
2252	Fowler had three birdies in his last four holes but he too reached only eight-under.
2253	France joined forces with Ireland in threatening to block a trade deal with South America unless Brazil takes action to stop vast tracts of the Amazonian rainforest from burning.
2254	France’s Interior Ministry said firefighters might not be able to save the structure.
2255	Francis Marion is 13-3 overall and tied for second in the conference at 9-2.
2256	Francis said the statue had been inspired by a passage in “Letter to the Hebrews,” from the New Testament: “Do not forget to show hospitality to strangers, for by so doing some people have shown hospitality to angels without knowing it.”
2257	“Francis today is the object of a violent campaign, precisely because of his supposed liberalism on questions of sexual morality, by conservative cardinals who are very homophobic – and many of them, secretly homosexual,” writes Martel.
2258	Frank doesn’t feel it is his problem when everyone turns against the DA’s office for this black list, until then officers will continue to make arrests as warranted; but that is as far as it is supposed to go.
2259	Frank Stella: Selections from the Permanent Collection –
2260	Fred McRota can do it too.
2261	Freicoin (FRC) traded 1.3% higher against the dollar and now trades at $0.0082 or 0.00000076 BTC.
2262	French police fired tear gas and water cannons on Tuesday during clashes with firefighters protesting in Paris over their working conditions.
2263	Frequent heavy and thundery downpours across northern England throughout, and in Scotland into the afternoon.
2264	Fresh analysis of a 33,000-year-old skull belongs to a man who 'died a violent death'
2265	Friday’s hearing was nearly continued when prosecutors announced they added charges of robbery and criminal conspiracy to commit robbery against the four.
2266	Friedman has brought a breath of fresh air and some new ideas since she started working at the boutique five years ago, her father says.
2267	“Friend Like That” similarly drags under a heavy (though not quite as egregious) load of effects after a promising, more pared back beginning.
2268	Friends won’t want to do anything without you, and some of your most interesting life events will come out of spur-of-the-moment requests.
2269	Frohnmaier said that when you drive along the switchbacks in Crimea, it feels like Verona: the architecture, the wine, the seaside location.
2270	From 5 to 8 p.m. Monday, November 25, the Long I Pie Shop will host its annual with Infinite Monkey Theorem at the latter's headquarters at 3200 Larimer Street.
2271	From 9 am the club bistro that overlooks the pool will be serving up schooners and full English breakfasts and the lunch and dinner menu kicks off from 11 am.
2272	From a survey of 4,320 likely Democratic primary voters who were surveyed between Sept. 5 and Sept. 11. The same people were surveyed again from Sept. 12 to Sept 13; 2202 responded to the second wave.
2273	From cinnamon to saffron, the bakers put their best spice flavor combinations together.
2274	From Fox News to MSNBC, our airwaves are filled with voices competing to be the loudest and the most adept at ridiculing their opponents.
2275	From neighbouring Franschhoek rather than Stellenbosch, but as smooth and polished as a Stellenbosch.
2276	From the cut, to the sleeves, to the matching lip, it’s stunning.
2277	From the internet-breaking first teaserStar Wars: The Force Awakens to the sheer anticipation around and demand for the first trailers for Avengers: Infinity War, movie trailers have become genuine events in their own right.
2278	From the narration, one could tell that Babita has heard and narrated this story several times.
2279	From there, he told everyone his name in case they forgot and said if you have to miss WrestleMania, at least its good to be back the night after.
2280	From there, it will accompany to the Indian Ocean in support of Operation Projection and Operation Artemis.
2281	From the sound of it, Markakis could be heading to the IL for 10-days, if not longer.
2282	“From those turnovers the opponent opened some counter-attacks.
2283	From “Zambia shall be saved” to now “MMD shall be saved”.
2284	Fr. Peter told TNH that “the Centennial celebration of a parish provides a wonderful opportunity to reflect on the sacrifice, love and dedication of previous generations who established the foundation of the parish on the Rock that is Christ.
2285	Fruit teas and slushes, boba teas and more to quench your thirst, plus gourmet quesadillas with mouthwatering options including brisket, steak and chicken, plus roasted corn, green chile, mango, mushrooms and more.
2286	FTX Token (FTT) traded down 3% against the dollar and now trades at $1.36 or 0.00015519 BTC.
2287	FTX Token (FTT) traded up 6.2% against the dollar and now trades at $1.43 or 0.00016650 BTC.
2288	Fucking do something for once and don’t ignore people!
2289	Fuel consumption, and therefore revenue from an excise tax, will gradually decline over a period of time.
2290	Fuller says the other person killed in the shooting was 61-year-old Toni Kelly, an employee, and that business owner Chris Grubbs was also wounded.
2291	Full marks for retaining the Gujarati flavour but the flavour is of no use if you fail to get the ingredients right.
2292	Fulton held up Swann.
2293	Funeral arrangements entrusted to the Arthur Funeral Home - Barton & Kiteley Chapel (492 Wellington Street E. 705- 759-2522).
2294	Funeral services for will be held August 6th at 11-a.
2295	Fun games for the whole family!
2296	‘Funke Akindele-Bello Got Her Twins Through Surrogate’
2297	Funniest statement I've read for a long time!
2298	Further, Ariola said there have been no discussions with Meeks and that they would stick by their man, Kogan.
2299	Further discussions culminated in the 1952 Delhi Agreement, a presidential order that extended Indian citizenship to the residents of the state but left the maharaja's privileges for residents intact.
2300	Furthermore, Ecobank has so far set up EcobankPay Zones in over 50 locations in different parts of the country.
2301	Furthermore, Marvel Studios has already been planting seeds at how Thanos' earlier days in the MCU could be essential or worth exploring.
2302	Further, replacing striking workers—also known as scabbing—is illegal.
2303	Further, the suit asserts that PHEAA’s ‘deceptive, unfair and abusive practices’ have largely caused a high number of student loan forgiveness application to be rejected.
2304	Future net income may be negatively affected by additional write-downs on the value of MSRs that management anticipates as result of interest rate declines in the third quarter of 2019.
2305	Future reductions on the tax liability of utilities will cause a shift in the tax burden to all the other property tax payers in the taxing district.
2306	GAA President John Horan chaired a selection committee made up of Gaelic Games writers from the national media to decide on the team earlier this week.
2307	Galloping bass notes throughout every song.
2308	Gambia has requested "provisional measures" - the equivalent of a restraining order against Myanmar to protect the Rohingya population until the case is heard in full.
2309	Game time Friday night at Dark Horse Stadium is 7:30 p.m.
2310	Gaming can be quite addictive for many Americans.
2311	Garcia added a third in the final minute, rounding Dlamini and shooting into the empty net.
2312	Garda Forensic Collision Investigators have been examining the scene of the crash today and have now made an appeal for witnesses.
2313	Gardaí advise drivers to divert via the N52.
2314	Gardonville allocated $2,500 to match bounties in townships where it runs fiber-optic cable.
2315	Garoppolo has shown that he has the chops to be a starter in this league.
2316	Gary More, 32, died after he was shot several times outside his home in Gartness Drive, Airdrie, in September 2018.
2317	Gasaway is also seeking attorney fees from Habersham County in the lawsuits.
2318	Gaskin has been questioning the reason behind the delay in the case.
2319	Gatestone also reserves the right to edit comments for length, clarity and grammar.
2320	Gateway to College student Juan Jimenez has been vaping for the past six months and said he is doing it in an effort to quit smoking completely.
2321	Gender laws discriminate against men,” reads the slogan on the side of a bus.
2322	General Dynamics Co. has a 1-year low of $143.87 and a 1-year high of $207.72.
2323	General Electric had employed some 10,000 workers and the credit union served only them and immediate family.
2324	Generation Z is much more comfortable engaging via smartphone-based visual and digital means, regardless of who they are dealing with.
2325	GENEVA—The United States won a World Trade Organization ruling on China’s price support for grains, successfully challenging a calculation methodology that is also used by India.
2326	Genevieve volunteered at the Hutchinson Regional Medical Center (formerly Hutchinson Hospital) gift shop for ten years and was a member of the Hutchinson Regional Medical Center Hospital Auxiliary.
2327	Geoffrey McGeachin, whose first novel was a comic romp about a bank manager's mid-life crisis, remembers Anthony's delight when the publishers agreed to the title she wanted: "Selwa rang and said, 'They're going with Fat, Fifty and F…ed!
2328	George Karakostantis, previously executive vice president of strategic accounts and operations, has been named the new chief executive officer for the fast-growing technical services firm.
2329	GEORGE TOWN: Amanah Penang chairman Mujahid Yusof Rawa, a federal minister, has relinquished his position in order to concentrate on his government duties.
2330	Georgia’s bigotry laws and anti-abortion laws make filming here more difficult.
2331	Gephardt responded by saying he did care about young voters and that he had a prior commitment in the all-important state of Iowa that conflicted with the Rock the Vote forum.
2332	Germany seems to be one of the few countries exploring alternatives to viewing migrants as enemies, creating the basis for cooperation and mutual understanding.
2333	Germany's Florian Wellbrock claims gold in the 1,500-metre freestyle, had already won 10-kilometre open water race.
2334	Germany's meteorological service DWD announced that 41.5°C has been recorded on Thursday in the northwestern town of Lingen and later flagged that a preliminary reading of 42.6°C had been recorded but that it needed to be confirmed.
2335	Get familiar with www.moetabebe.com.”
2336	Get saucy after you file.
2337	Get the latest updates and news of Haryana Assembly constituency, election results with party, votes and candidates names.
2338	Getting the best laptop with CD/DVD drive is bit difficult these.
2339	Getting very sick of this lot.
2340	Get To Know 'Party of One' Singer-Songwriter Alex Kinsey With These 10 Fun Facts!
2341	Ghana: First National Bank Ghana Introduces Agency Banking - allAfrica.
2342	Ghana's coach James Kwesi Appiah looks on during the 2019 Africa Cup of Nations (CAN) Group F football match between Guinea-Bissau and Ghana at the Suez Stadium in the north-eastern Egyptian city on July 2, 2019.
2343	"Gibraltar did its bit in relation to the Grace 1 to stop the vessel when we did,” Mr Picardo said.
2344	“Gibraltar is a sonically rich area,” Mr Holmes said.
2345	Giese says, referencing an amusing episode in which her parents compelled her to write out “I will be grateful for everything I get” 1,000 times after she was ungrateful for an oversized maroon coat.
2346	Gifts should be delivered, unwrapped, to 1001 Mary Street by Friday, December 6th at 4pm.
2347	G-III Apparel Group, Ltd. (NASDAQ:GIII) Director Laura H. Pomerantz sold 821 shares of the company’s stock in a transaction on Wednesday, April 3rd.
2348	Gilder Gagnon Howe & Co. LLC grew its holdings in Zai Lab by 2.7% during the 1st quarter.
2349	Gilts are plummeting and could see further losses as rate cut odds continue to dwindle.
2350	Ginnie, like the Duchess, has young children but, unlike the Duchess, works full-time.
2351	Gio a good player but lacks the explosion he had first and second year!
2352	Girl: But I’m going to hit you!
2353	Girls start wearing rings on their necks as young as two, although when they are that young they wear some that can come on and off.
2354	Give a Care when politics forgets basic fairness!
2355	Give every child the best start in life by recruiting more teachers, as part of an extra £560m for schools.
2356	Give him a couple of months to sort himself out.
2357	“Give It Up” is jazz seen through the lens of George Clinton-esque funk while “This Is It” shows flashes of glam rock.
2358	Given how well he and Aleister Black worked together in NXT, it’s a shame to put them together on the main roster without any promotion.
2359	Given rising competition with the entry of new brands, existing AC brands have resorted to aggressive schemes and higher ad spends to create demand pull.
2360	Given that Clark didn’t exactly start out his Kansas City Chiefs career with a bang, the criticism was immediate.
2361	"Given that Tesla hit its stride in the back half of last year, it’s essential that the company finds some way to keep this sales momentum going if it wants to prove to investors it’s on the right track."
2362	Given the establishment annoyance at her, a primary challenger might have found some real consultant muscle willing to help out in the effort to unseat her.
2363	Given the popularity of the Governor, it’s not hard to picture a spinoff revealing how Philip Blake evolved into the monster seen in the show.
2364	Giving Huawei employees access to the certification center -- an area that's closely guarded because of competition concerns with other carriers -- allegedly sparked a scheme to steal Tappy's secrets and send them back to China.
2365	“Glasgow has seen a massive reduction in violent youth crime even though the city itself is more violent than London.
2366	Glass installation on the outside of the $1.9 billion, 65,000-fan capacity stadium began last week, according to Raiders President Marc Badain.
2367	Glaze should harden within 1 hour, and then cake will be ready to enjoy!
2368	Gledhill claimed that Emerdata’s favored administrators had gone to extremes in order to avoid complying with the regulator which ordered Cambridge Analytica to respond to a subject access request (SAR) from Carroll.
2369	Global Ophthalmic Devices Market Forecast to 2022 provides strategists, marketers and senior management with the critical information they need to assess the global ophthalmic devices market.
2370	Gnani, (NR) Aug. 9, GNA – Bishop Vincent Sowah Boi – Nai, Catholic Bishop for the Yendi Diocese has called on Priests and other stakeholders to monitor moral and professional behavior of teachers and students at all levels of education.
2371	Goals from Danilo, Gonzalo Higuain and Cristiano Ronaldo gave the Italian champions a 3-0 lead over Napoli.
2372	Goals give you something to look forward to and work toward, i.e. help keep you motivated!
2373	God bless you always and forever.
2374	"God does not give us everything we want, but He does fulfill His promises, leading us along the best and straightest paths to Himself."
2375	God gave Adam a piece of land we popularly call the Garden of Eden when Adam was only one day old.
2376	God used human agents.
2377	Gohan will be there to beat Freeza when the time comes, but for now they need to work together to beat Dyspo.
2378	Going back further still, the idea of using blockchain technology for this purpose sprung out of 12 months of consideration as regards how the company could best utilize the emerging technology.
2379	“Going into 2020 we should take our destiny into our own hands.
2380	Go-Jek is a technology start-up firm based in Jakarta, Indonesia that specializes in ride-hailing and logistics.
2381	GoldBlocks (CURRENCY:GB) traded 16% higher against the dollar during the 24 hour period ending at 17:00 PM E.T. on January 26th.
2382	Goldman Sachs Group cut shares of Aston Martin Lagonda Global to a “neutral” rating and reduced their price target for the stock from GBX 620 ($8.16) to GBX 520 ($6.84) in a research report on Tuesday, December 3rd.
2383	Gonsalves told legislators that several other countries serviced by LIAT — including Trinidad and Tobago — are not included in the request because they have opposed, up front, putting in any emergency funding into the ailing airline.
2384	Good call by driver since 495 is also very steady traffic.
2385	Google for India event 2019 Highlights: Google Assistant Vodafone-Idea phone line, Pay Jobs and morehttps://indianexpress.
2386	Google has more than 1,000 employees at its current offices at 320 N. Morgan St., and will add hundreds more jobs over the next two years as the new finance hub moves in, according to the mayor’s office.
2387	Google Home and Amazon Echo are the two most popular brands of small, table-top speakers.
2388	Google shook up the email business when Gmail launched in 2004 with much more free storage than rivals were providing at the time.
2389	“Government notes the present wanton, upsurge and ever escalating unjustified increase in prices,” Mnangagwa said.
2390	“Government prematurely comes to the public to issue a statement when statements had not even been taken (from my clients).
2391	Governments are increasingly warning against the risks private businesses face from such attacks, both those carried out by foreign governments and financially motivated criminals.
2392	Governments have tried it on neo-Nazis, members of the Red Brigades and IRA militants, among others, with mixed results.
2393	Governor Charlie Baker, Congresswoman Ayanna Pressley and WBZ’s Lisa Hughes attended the event.
2394	GPL has a 30% stake in this joint development project, as stated in the investors’ presentation.
2395	GPU Coin can be purchased on the following cryptocurrency exchanges: Cryptopia, CryptoBridge and Novaexchange.
2396	Grainne Teggart at Amnesty International’s Belfast office has given them support and advice, and through solicitor Ciaran Moynagh they have got the backing of the Public Interest Litigation Support Project in pursuing legal redress.
2397	Grand National 2019: What time does the race start on Saturday, what TV channel is it on and what is the latest weather forecast?
2398	Gratz wastes no time in throwing the young men into a Higgins boat — “basically a big metal bathtub,” familiar from images of the beach landings.
2399	Great Lakes Advisors LLC purchased a new stake in Williams Companies in the first quarter valued at $842,000.
2400	Greece’s creditors, which also includes the IMF, control the terms of the country’s debt repayments.
2401	Greece wants a Turkey anchored in the West, not a Turkey veering toward Vladimir Putin’s Russia and acting bellicose.
2402	Greenpeace praised the vote against the Commission’s proposal.
2403	Green product users said they experienced warm glow and people who felt isolated from their communities reported feeling less so after using a green product.
2404	Green said the charges stem from an incident in which he was armed and accompanying a security professional.
2405	Greenwald also has an ear for memorable dialogue, with his characters casually tossing off great one-liners practically every other sentence.
2406	Greys is my favorite show!
2407	Griffin Asset Management Inc. acquired a new position in shares of Qorvo in the 2nd quarter worth approximately $42,000.
2408	Griffith is 6’ 7” tall, of medium build, dark in complexion, with a low haircut.
2409	“Growing tensions between Iran and the US have put the two countries on the precipice of military confrontation,” it reads.
2410	“Growing up I was very close to Devin.
2411	“Growing up watching ‘That’s So Raven’ and seeing her intern for a fashion house, I thought it was the coolest thing ever.
2412	Growing up, we’ve always shared our birthday with our twin brothers, now we share it with each other.”
2413	GSK does not sell its drug in the US, where retailers such as CVS and Walmart have already chosen to pull ranitidine from their shelves over the same safety fears.
2414	Guaido repeated his vow that the aid would enter “one way or another.”
2415	Guardiola has been forced into changes at centre-back due to a long-term knee injury sustained by Aymeric Laporte and a thigh issue that has kept John Stones sidelined.
2416	Guest speaker Karen Thompson spoke on her experience aboard the Mercy Ship Australia stationed in Africa as part of a medical team.
2417	Guided tours run Saturday to Thursday, and cost OMR3 (£6) per person (bookings essential).
2418	Guidelines for peer review will be manufactured available separately.
2419	Guinness Nigeria Plc is 42 price lower, just as International Breweries Plc, Nigerian Breweries Plc and Dangote Sugar Refinery Plc are 60 per cent, 42 per cent and 35 per cent lower respectively.
2420	Gujarat: Court stays conviction of Congress MLA in 24-year-old illegal mining casehttps://indianexpress.
2421	Gunderson took the ball down the line of scrimmage and stopped the clock on a four-yard run for the first at the 39 with 1:10 remaining in regulation.
2422	Gunter also admitted that doctors “are not good communicators,” and due to lack of research, “gaps in medicine are being exploited.”
2423	Guyanese shouldn’t forget that Rodney’s greatest threat to the man who he dubbed “King Kong” was his infiltration of the army with his revolutionary rhetoric.
2424	Guys eventually will want out when a team doesn’t want to pay them.
2425	Gynecologic oncologist Dr. Rodney Rocconi, interim director of USA Health Mitchell Cancer Institute, reviews findings with research Assistant Professor Luciana Madeira da Silva, Ph.
2426	Had several of his albums back in HS and college.
2427	Hadzic and Masson both won their matches 6-2, 7-5.
2428	Haiti after today faces Costa Rica as well.
2429	Hale: I always describe Gary as a dog who is returning to his vomit.
2430	Half an hour later, he says, “Photographs taken by our students are thoroughly analysed and we figure out where they have gained or faltered.
2431	HALIFAX—Police have confirmed that seven children died in an early morning fire Tuesday that witnesses said quickly engulfed a home in a Halifax suburb.
2432	Halliwell was arrested five days later after CCTV showed Sian getting in his green Toyota Avensis taxi outside a nightclub.
2433	Halsey has become a seasoned pro when it comes to red carpets, and she slayed as she posed for photos and the photographers snapped away.
2434	Hamilton’s parents separated when he was 2 and he lived with his mother until he was 8. His father, Anthony, didn’t know what to do with him when he had custody on weekends, so he got him started racing radio-controlled cars.
2435	Hamish told the Mail: ‘I forgive her because underneath it all I know she is just hurting.
2436	Hammond then finished the thread, by saying: “Apology accepted, though I did not use the word “financiers.”
2437	HAMPSTEAD, Md. (WJZ) — Crews have brought a large wild land fire in Baltimore County under control.
2438	Hampton plans to run ads in the districts of vulnerable Republican candidates that claim those candidates are considering voting in favor of impeaching President Donald Trump, saying "that's how you would actually influence elections."
2439	Hanart Chinese Lantern Festival starts November 21 at the Pomona Fairplex through January 5, 2020.
2440	Handke has become "one of the most influential writers in Europe after the Second World War," according to the Nobel committee.
2441	Handmade with local superfoods and all natural flavors, the brightly colored popsicles typified this Perfect Vineyard Day (PVD), along with distinctly Island gear courtesy of Tuck Life clothing.
2442	Hannah posted the picture on Instagram back in 2014 with the caption: 'Miss this little'un'
2443	Hannibal tartine — A colorful and playful nod to Silence of the Lambs, with duck and rabbit liver mousse, fiddleheads, pickled shallots, fava beans and a “nice” chianti-sweet potato butter.
2444	Hants Response Cops posted on Twitter: ‘Andover units sprung into action this morning after a dream job came in of reports of a mattress blocking a road.
2445	Happy Mother's Day to all our female readers!
2446	Harold Brown, Howard Scott, Lee Oskar and B.B Dickerson are known around the world as “The Originals”.
2447	Harris is an original co-sponsor of the Green New Deal, and mentions the resolution frequently on the campaign trail.
2448	Harry and Meghan’s ten-day trip starts in Cape Town today and will conclude in Johannesburg.
2449	Has anybody thought to check the graves of Groucho, Chico and Harpo?
2450	Has anyone ever told you that your mobile phone could cause cancer?
2451	Hasbro announced on Thursday (August 22) they had purchased Entertainment One, a multimedia company that owns the children’s franchises Peppa Pig and PJ Masks.
2452	Has got the point, when drafting a complaint letter there could possibly be an tendency to really go on just to make sure the receiver.
2453	Has Princess Eugenie been waiting generously for her sister Beatrice to reveal her engagement to Edoardo Mapelli Mozzi before making an announcement of her own?
2454	“Has the time not come for European states that have not yet recognized the State of Palestine to do so, especially in light of your belief in the two-state solution?”
2455	» Has won four straight after losing three in a row.
2456	Hate speech is a reenactment of the sedition law brought to Nigeria by the colonial regime.
2457	Have 3 rods rigged and ready to go with surface lures, spoons and trolling lures to entertain while waiting for the real action to start.
2458	Have a holding period of not less than five years for the equity funds.
2459	Have flashlights with fresh batteries available and a battery-operated radio, ready to tune into local stations such as 1450 AM/FM 102.7 KVML as well as 93.5 KKBN and Star 92.7.
2460	Haven't seen people vaping that way yet.
2461	Have to make a few changes and keep getting better.
2462	Have you been following all of the off-screen drama about Jed, rose lovers?
2463	Have you forgotten the previous IG report you kept assuring us would find bias and corruption, but found none?
2464	Have you spoken to the President about this recording?
2465	Having had a limited grass-court preparation, Kyrgios found himself trailing 1-4 in the first set.
2466	Having Ivanka Trump take part in official meetings and events during the president’s Asia trip is like putting one of the United States soccer coaches’ kids out on the field for a Women’ World Cup match.
2467	Having picked up the ball in his own half, Hughes drove forward with a powerful run before cutting back inside and bending a right-footed effort wide of the far post.
2468	Having scored wins over Monticello and Charlottesville in the tournament’s opening rounds, the Lions went into the Jefferson District Championship game with an energetic home crowd cheering them on.
2469	Having that data is an essential first step in building a stronger understanding of how community colleges are performing, and could lead to specific accountability measures related to Title IV funds.
2470	Hazleton Area took the lead when Haylee Petroski scored just over two minutes in, but Minichello tied the game with 2:45 to play in the first half, then gave the Warriors the lead with another goal 1:21 before halftime.
2471	He actually is kind of a nerd, so we like a lot of the same things, because I am pretty much a nerd myself.
2472	Head cook Efren Cohuo has been working at the classic burger joint for six years.
2473	He added: ‘He was in a pretty bad way, so I just pulled him out from where he was and made him as comfortable as I could.
2474	He added: “I can’t believe that such a thing is possible.
2475	He added: “I’d always thought I was going to have to make this career change sooner rather than later and it appeared that this was the right time to do it.
2476	He added: 'I'm just grateful Hunter is at an age where she knows to spit something out if it's not right.'
2477	He added: “I only discovered that I should have been getting more money after I read an article about enhanced pensions on a financial website.
2478	He added that a fine not less than P10 million, but not more than P20 million would be imposed.
2479	He added that complaints regarding any violation of the Food Act can be directed to the hotline- 0112676161.
2480	He added that the defendant robbed the occupants of a HP laptop worth N70, 000, N4, 000 cash and one Nike slippers worth N1, 000.
2481	He added that there was “no direct relationship” between the resumption of trade talks and the purchases.
2482	He added that they could also introduce passes, monthly or yearly, for regular passengers as well as special pass for students.
2483	He added: ‘The idea of YouTubers exclusively focussing on what they to make sounds like a dream come true.
2484	He added the rapid increase of the population coupled with un-procedural land occupation contributes to the poor living conditions of people in shacks.
2485	He adds that in November 2018, SFPIRG received a message declining the invitation to meet, as they had “come to a decision in terms of space.
2486	Headley also says they are now able to broadcast the meetings more efficiently and for less cost than before.
2487	Headline: US troops invade Greenland, Trump "I thought it was Grenada"
2488	He admitted committing the rape and murder during his interrogation and even re-created the crimes for his investigators.
2489	He advised the beneficiaries to be passionate about the traders and be focused in their entrepreneurship so as create wealth for themselves.
2490	He advised the people to be vigilant and report any suspicious persons and movements to security agents or vigilantes group.
2491	Headway speed is defined as slow, idle speed, or speed only fast enough to maintain steerage on course.
2492	He again tries the reverse sweep.
2493	He agreed to have alcohol abstinence monitoring equipment fitted.
2494	Heald said her son’s improved tolerance allowed him to travel overseas by himself for the first time.
2495	He alleged he had spoken to the people who stole his bag by calling his cellphone, which had been inside the bag, adding that the suspects demanded money for the return of his belongings.
2496	He also allowed 20 pressures, two quarterback hits and one sack during that seven-game tenure in the middle.
2497	He also discussed defying the expectations of his parents and family members to go into comedy after studying political science at the University of California, Davis.
2498	He also disparaged special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation, mocked Democratic presidential contenders Joe Biden, Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren and boasted about the media presence at his rally.
2499	He also expressed concern for the stability of the cathedral and its central rose window.
2500	He also gave an interview to Robin Roberts of ABC News that aired Thursday in which he said he was “pissed” at people who did not believe he was attacked.
2501	He also has experience in broadcast journalism with Grampian Television.
2502	He also mentioned a technique that arises when the weather is nice, in which an offender speaks to an elderly woman gardening while their literal partner in crime sneaks around back and robs the house.
2503	He also posted photo of himself as a cadaver on the show, along with the caption: “Xfinity Comcast did this to me on season 6, of POWER I’m dead,” he wrote.
2504	He also said it was better for the group to send a delegation to interface with the lawmakers rather than taking laws into its own hand.
2505	He also said that it takes about sixty to ninety days to bring any new food concept into existence at BU.
2506	He also said that Menominee’s CTE teachers are on a “heavy metal tour” today.
2507	He also said that those suing against the use of the funds would suffer “irreparable harm” from the construction of the wall.
2508	He also said they needed not to worry about when the implementation of the minimum wage would commence.
2509	He also spoke about how he does not fancy Baron Corbin facing Kurt Angle in the Olympic gold medallist's retirement match.
2510	He also stressed that economic sanctions affect Syrians in all fields, and that they must be ended, lauding Indonesia’s positions in support of Syria.
2511	He also went out with American singer Madison Beer.
2512	He also wrote that it isn’t an imposition to spend time with her because she’s so beautiful.
2513	“Healthcare.gov crashed just hours before the Dec. 15 deadline to buy health insurance, putting at risk the opportunity for Americans to sign up for coverage they and their loved ones need,” Sen. Wyden said.
2514	Health care spending (and doctors’ salaries) quickly skyrocketed.
2515	Healthy living for me these days is about how capable I feel.
2516	He and his team devised a special rig to scan the 70-millimetre film and convert it so it could be edited and made into the finished documentary.
2517	He and three dozen parishioners and alumni of the school gathered in the church basement June 23 to hear the plan.
2518	He announced he would boycott the rest of his appeal hearings.
2519	He announced that Ghana would host the next WANNPRES Regional Conference in August 2020.
2520	He apparently offers no other hard evidence that Kushner engineered the firing.
2521	He appointed himself Britain's chief paedo-finder general and created a moral panic.
2522	Heard it was fantastic.
2523	“He arrives ready to race.
2524	Heart attacks halved by daily ‘polypill’, strokes reduced…
2525	Heaton said she wanted to raise awareness about preventing the disease.
2526	Heavy rains at the start of January also means that potholes, punctures and buckled rims are now an all too familiar sight.
2527	He believed that his battle with Wolverine is not over until one of them dies.
2528	He believes the biggest mistake parents do is not making their children the most important thing in their lives and realising that their teenagers are under a lot of stress.
2529	He called on Nigerians to support the corporation in its effort to secure pipelines in the interest of the country.
2530	He called on party supporters to get ready to face the NPP government in 2020 to save the innocent Ghanaians from the incompetent NPP.
2531	He called on the Egyptian and South Sudanese authorities to rescue the student and make Egypt a safe place for South Sudanese.
2532	He called this “unacceptable.”
2533	He called upon the students to take this opportunity to study Food Science and Technology and pursue path-breaking research.
2534	He came off the bench to score a second half hat-trick for Thomas Tuchel’s men against the Belgium side.
2535	He came to know that the boy was hungry but didn't have food.
2536	He can be reached by email at brian.
2537	He can retrain his penis by using a lighter, gentler grip during masturbation.
2538	He chose to add yoga to his life as a way of healing.
2539	He claimed his interrogators accused him of being a British spy, a mastermind of the protests, and a “British proxy” to incite the unrest.
2540	He coined the widely used term “godwinks," which refers to events and happenings that can only be explained as miracles and “divine coincidences."
2541	He contended that the publications cause him to be termed as a sexual molester, assaulter and rapist, which was unfounded and false.
2542	He continued, “It’s the right thing to do.”
2543	He controlled the ball and lashed a shot that took a slight deflection before spinning past Schmeichel.
2544	He could not get rid of the genie.
2545	He cut inside and found Lukaku on the edge of the Palace area.
2546	He cut off the logo of the t-shirt company at the endhttps://t.
2547	He debunked the claim by Faleke or the public notion that the reconciliation brokered between the Kogi governor, was on behalf of the Audu/ Faleke faction of APC, saying he is on his own and entitled to his political decisions.
2548	He describes his willingness to take risks in his adventures as a reflection of “complete conviction of my actions and gives my mountaineering a great personal value.”
2549	He describes it as an eerie experience, knowing that his similar emergency could have ended just as darkly.
2550	“He did, and this was all his doing.
2551	He did file an appeal against the Tribunal’s ruling at the Appeal Court, hoping that judgment would be in his favour.
2552	He did not realize that, by wearing a baseball cap in public that did not bear the Curly W, he was advocating a set of issues that drive all of us into opposite corners, probably because he wasn’t doing any such thing.
2553	He did not realize until he was an adult and went out into the world, the extent to which differences can cause havoc, he said.
2554	He didn't the money.
2555	He does many talks on the dangers and toxicity of political correctness and believes that freedom of speech is under attack by the left.
2556	He donated $10,000 to the Jack and Jill’s Children Center, he provided gifts for 150 kids in Broward County in Florida, and he donated $5,000 to the organization.
2557	He eats solely from gardens, foraging or fishing.
2558	He ended up being trafficked into a cannabis farm in Derbyshire.
2559	He ends with a plea: “I don’t mean to question you, I’m just confused / I don’t know what else to do … I know this ain’t your fault / It’s the devil’s work.”
2560	He even considers dropping the case.
2561	He even loved to discuss it and was not above asking a journalist earning a thousand or two what he thought of certain shares like Orkay since he had a few crores to invest!
2562	He even warned her; Mona figuring out he was the one who wrote, “They’re Watching” on her wall.
2563	He explained that the only case where people could raise issues is when a President is ill and was unable to communicate his absence to the National Assembly.
2564	He feels damn near unhinged, but he's very calculated, so what he's putting out right now, I'm digging."
2565	He followed the tracks till they ended and then he drilled a hole every 25 yards or so until he reached his desired location.
2566	He found the valve and released the rest of the water threatening Armageddon.
2567	He frightened lots of people in real life too.
2568	He further appealed to the audience to gear up for the forthcoming elections and ensure the victory of DSS.
2569	He further claimed that the continuation of the process was unfair and in breach of his rights.
2570	He further indicated that STMA had registered all the beneficiaries of the LEAP programme on National Health Insurance Scheme.
2571	He gave away about ten samples of Slybera and now he's waiting to find out if anyone comes back with any data.
2572	He got plenty of run support this time, leaving with a 6-0 lead.
2573	He got some high praise from Ron Carlivati, DOOL’s current head writer and the former head writer of GH.
2574	He had 108mcgs of alcohol in 100mls of breath.
2575	He had a standout 2019 season, posting seven wins and 78 strikeouts in 79.2 innings pitched.
2576	He had no problem taking down these clowns.
2577	He hailed it as a way for Americans to work for world peace and understanding.
2578	'He has affected my mental health.
2579	He has also been convicted of criminal damage.
2580	He has argued that the Betsy Ross flag is 'racist,' because it flew at a time when slavery was legal in America.
2581	He has been at the Flagler County jail since, but his mental state is unclear.
2582	He has been consistently excellent this season and was twice named the Ray Guy Award Punter of the Week.
2583	He has been inducted into the Omaha Chamber Business Hall of Fame and the Nebraska Commercial Real Estate Hall of Fame.
2584	He has been in the struggle to make Nigeria a great nation since we got independence.
2585	He has been the voice of the Oregon coast, and I have nothing but admiration for his accomplishments and the work he has done for the citizens of Oregon,” stated Cribbins.
2586	He has faced criticism from fellow Republicans for the US withdrawal.
2587	He has held weddings there.
2588	He has never been entirely forgiven.
2589	He has not scored for a couple of weeks and a try in the final would be timely way to break the drought.
2590	He has offended lots of members of the cabal and they want to deal with him.”
2591	He has often lamented how much time he has missed over the years but always seems to rally, and impressively.
2592	He has shared his experiences with many audiences on national television, including The Oprah Winfrey Show.
2593	He has since been into five countries, including the Philippines.
2594	He has told me before he does not think newspapers should report their own bad news.
2595	He has worked in Mukilteo for over three years now.
2596	He hopes to serve 50-75 veterans per year in stays lasting three to five days.
2597	He however composed his team after six months in his first tenure.
2598	He hugged her and told her, "I love you just like anyone else and I'm not going to hope you rot and die.
2599	He implied the term had been used during an earlier conversation with former U.N. climate negotiator Christiana Figueres, whom he was speaking alongside.
2600	Heintzeman didn’t seem impressed (he didn’t respond to interview requests).
2601	He is a frightfully fun conversationalist, and uproarious, over-the-top company.
2602	He is also a film critic for Spokane Public Radio, where he has co-hosted the weekly show since 2011.
2603	‘He is a man who looks in a mirror and falls in love at first sight.’
2604	'He is a young man who has an attractive, caring young woman who was giving him a highly unusual amount of attention and the warning bells should have been ringing much earlier.
2605	He is currently the executive producer for Rob Dyrdek's Fantasy Factory (2019) is a biopic about the legendary rock band Motley Crue.
2606	He is dropping names of the powerful people he has called so that they turn it around and go after some people.
2607	He is immortal like many of characters, and as a former berserker he worshipped Odin, with his band and its music now acting as one of the old god’s sources of power.
2608	“He is in great order and will work on Tuesday, but he is the one they have to beat again on Saturday.”
2609	He is memorialized on YouTube and honored and quoted on Facebook.
2610	He is said to have been very much in favour of a merger with Fiat Chrysler but Reuters says that his efforts were “scuppered” by the French Finance Minister Bruno Le Maire.
2611	He joined a French-speaking liberal party in Belgium aged 16, became an MP at 23 and was the country's youngest ever minister by 24.
2612	“He just keeps going, because we let him.”
2613	He kicked off 2019 by rocking Planet Rock presents Winter’s End where he was joined by special guest and musical kindred spirit Kim Jennett, who performed vocals on his 2018 single ‘Take Me Home’.
2614	"He knew how to speak to everyone with a simplicity and a grandeur.
2615	He knows the baristas on his route (“She started about a year ago”), the Fremont cobbler who would sometimes fix his shoes for free and the window washer who was diagnosed with cancer.
2616	He leads the main opposition party, and it is considered a realistic possibility that Labour could unseat Theresa May’s governing Conservative Party in a future general election.
2617	He’ll immediately elevate the competition we have going at wide receiver and the experience he brings to the group and the offensive side of the ball will be extremely beneficial.”
2618	Hell, nobody even types out television anymore.
2619	“He’ll work kind of limited throughout the week, but he’s fully intending on playing,” Lynch said on 95.7 The Game, via the San Francisco Chronicle.
2620	“He looked fairly disappointed that he was going to head off on a mini-camp, do some really good training and have a few beers,” observed Schmidt, tongue firmly embedded in his cheek.
2621	He looks like a real party animal!
2622	He loved the people of Birmingham and leaves behind a legacy of creating places for gathering and healing, none more so than his work at Morningstar Baptist Church and the historic Sixteenth Street Baptist Church.
2623	He made the remarks in a meeting with a group of Iranian students who have managed to collect medals in different international science olympiads as well as members of Iran’s U21 volleyball team which collected the world title last week.
2624	Hemalatha had that BBMP would stress on “efficient administration” and schemes to “empower women, provide financial security, create a healthy environment, and to implement the Roshni Scheme to improve schools and colleges.”
2625	He may give you some prescription products that could help you.
2626	He may have been elected by a majority of the voting public, but that majority didn’t count.
2627	Hence, membership requires submission of a letter of intent to the Joint Oversight Panel (JOP) and the accomplishment of an enforcement map, demonstrating adherence to the nine privacy principles under the APEC framework.
2628	Hence, retail investors in equity mutual fund should invest through the SIP mode to make most of the upside potential while managing the downside risk.
2629	Hence this week the prime minister exercised royal prerogative powers to diminish parliamentary sovereignty.
2630	“Hence, when women resist or say ‘no,’ men think that these women are just playing ‘hard to get’ and they should be pursued more until they ‘surrender,’ or ‘hanggang bumigay,'”
2631	Henderson died at age 82 in 2016, while Reed died at age 59 in 1992.
2632	He needs to show better this year.
2633	He never did anything like this.
2634	He noted that none of the team’s success would be possible without his assistant coaches.
2635	He notes that its members will represent a very broad spectrum, ranging from members of the academic community to doctors, political scientists and philosophers.
2636	Henshaw has featured in over 100 movies, which include "Do Good Series", Consequences When the Sun Sets, Above Death, In God We Trust, A Million Tears, My Little Secret, Games Men Play, Stronger Than Pain.
2637	He often seemed confused or evasive, and had memory lapses that did not appear credible, given that his team had spent two years on this investigation and the report was released only four months ago.
2638	He only took five more shifts in what would be an emotionally charged 6-1 win over former captain John Tavares and the Maple Leafs, and they were tepid shifts for the normally abrasive blueliner.
2639	He opened her door and she fought him off with a mother’s rage, trying to prevent them from taking her car and thus her son.
2640	He performed with others, including well-known flautist Praveen Godkhindi, at the Town Hall.
2641	“He played pretty good.
2642	He played well and with the problems we have at the back, he is going to play a lot of minutes because I trust him a lot."
2643	He pointed to his waist.
2644	He pointed to the role of watershed management in carbon sequestration, water storage and soil conservation and said, “according to the researches made, soil erosion is reduced from 3 to 9 tons on each ha of watershed operations.”
2645	He praised the bishop’s efforts to engage area business leaders in support of Catholic education.
2646	He previously indicated he would plead not guilty to the charges when he appeared at Uxbridge Magistrates' Court last month.
2647	He probably easily fits into a 32 inch waist.
2648	He proudly served in the United States Army during the Korean War.
2649	He provided a mobile stage for a rally held at the Salt Lake City Building after the Orlando Pulse Massacre, knowing that it would rain that day.
2650	He pushed regular takers Eriksen and Trippier aside to have a go with a first-half free-kick and tried an ambitious volleyed lob that looped high over the crossbar, before Son beat him to the honour.
2651	He put forth an “integration plan,” which he claimed will work to integrate Haredi Israelis through national service programs rather than military service.
2652	He raps new man Thompson on the pads with his final ball but it was pitching well outside leg.
2653	Herbert’s love for writing began in a college creative writing course she took when she was just 15 years old.
2654	Her black fur-covered ankles completed the eccentric outfit.
2655	He reached home on Saturday to a warm welcome by his family and the villagers.
2656	He read some excerpts from his Master thesis: “Effective parenting and enhancing self-esteem in youth.”
2657	He really didn't have any chance of a good out come.
2658	Here are 10 things you don’t know about Mike’s wife.
2659	Here are a few noteworthy ones.
2660	Here are five players they could consider trading before final cuts are made.
2661	Here are insider tips from the pros.
2662	Here are some other ways that will help you deal with the pain.
2663	Here are the best options—all less than $500—to help get your child home safely from the hospital and beyond.
2664	Here are the rules, once again: The board is an array of hexagons.
2665	Here are the ten times Hogwarts should have shut down but didn’t.
2666	Here are the tips for throwing a good summer pool party.
2667	Here are three great events to diarise!
2668	Here are two of the best books I have read about it.
2669	He recently said that he hopes for talks with Rouhani, which responded that Trump must first ease sanctions.
2670	Here is a list of some developments â€“ but there are many others too.
2671	!’, he replied: ‘Most days, yeah.’
2672	Here's a primer on my Canadian holdings; I like to call them the Canadian Wide Moat 7. They are all in a unique oligopoly situation.
2673	Here’s a Recap of all the Stories You Need to Read on BellaNaija Weddings (Yesterday) - Hey BellaNaijarians, It has been fun on www.bellanaijaweddings.com this week and we just want to give you a recap of all that happened.
2674	Here's how SunSport rated and slated Unai Emery's men.
2675	Here's how You can get Your Next Movie Role!
2676	Here’s what readers say.
2677	Here's what Taika Waititi had to say.
2678	Here’s what Yahoo!
2679	Here, too, as is often the case, technology advances faster than ethical discourse.
2680	He returned to hosting “Jeopardy!” in August, but announced in September that he was undergoing chemotherapy again after revealing that he lost a large amount of weight and his “numbers went sky high.”
2681	Here we don’t even have apartment buildings.
2682	Here we have proof that as far as the relatively tame position current imagery most dinosaur illustrations take, we have no idea what went on back then.
2683	Her father, 32-year-old Israel Dahan, says he flipped over a folding table as soon as he saw the man enter carrying a long rifle.
2684	Her field is somewhat like an archeologist, but with a crime solving twist.
2685	Her final journey that day is recreated in this video.
2686	Her handshake was firm.
2687	Her husband Mark, 49 - Michael's son - said 'We didn't even think my dad was going to be here at one point.
2688	Her husband Scott, who is the most amazing man ever, writes down people’s names and a little list of what they’ve done before they visit so she remembers."
2689	Her kidneys eventually went into failure, and her father gave her one of his in 2012.
2690	Her Lara Croft tempered being a badass with bruised vulnerability; her running, jumping and tumbling was defined (naturally) by a balletic grace.
2691	Her lawyer scrambled to find clothes in a bag for her then took the outfit to her holding cell but she was still unhappy with them.
2692	Her mispronunciation of the word “bagel” even caused Señor Chang to call her the worst.
2693	Her mother, Mary Ann LeBlanc, says that at the time of the incident, Ramirez met her in a restaurant, crying.
2694	Her refusal to capitulate to Haredi demands ultimately left her unable to cobble together a coalition by the deadline.
2695	Her refusal to choose one resulted in the downplayed deception published locally online that same Friday afternoon.”
2696	Herrell ran against Torres Small in 2018, and is hoping to give her district a reason to remember why it voted Republican in the past.
2697	Her reward was a clean sweep of major movie award nominations in 2014: Oscar, Golden Globe, BAFTA, SAG, and Critics’ Choice.
2698	Her serve has arguably been her greatest asset tonight, and she takes only moments to take the latest game to love.
2699	HerSolution Booty Sculpt System is a 3-way system to give you a smoother, firmer and larger, rounded butt.
2700	Herta continues to overshadow IndyCar.
2701	He said an FCC auction is the faster, proven, legal approach.
2702	He said as soon as the Federal Government provided additional funds, the organisation would target more women to participate in its various intervention programmes to enable them raise their socio-economic status.
2703	He said as such, the commission at the national level would handle the issue of the council area, adding that he has executed his job of carrying out elections in the state.
2704	He said a total of 20 fire tenders were pressed into service on Saturday and more fire tenders were deployed.
2705	He said French police could 'not do more' to stop boat crossings, adding: 'We need to understand that we cannot monitor 400 or 500km of coast.'
2706	"He said he could handle him.
2707	He said he’d just come out of a long-term relationship and he was wary of getting serious with anyone, but I told him that we could go at his pace.
2708	He said he has appointed a team of prosecutors to help ensure that the investigations are “meticulous and fast-tracked.”
2709	He said he was also informed of her handing in a letter of resignation.
2710	He said he was surprised to hear the minivan ended up at Middlemore station because that was about 4km-5km away from where he saw the vehicle.
2711	He said his wife, Nurul Kamsiah Samat, who operated a home-based business making cookies and cakes had to cancel orders from her customers.
2712	He said: ‘Howdens is delighted to be sponsoring the awards to help bring well-deserved attention to the determined people who are working tirelessly across the country to make these empty buildings homes once again.
2713	He said in the forum that he was preparing to bid on an auction for a series of flight manuals for F-16 A and B model aircraft, according to the indictment.
2714	He said lives lost as a result of gas explosion can be prevented if a proper mechanism is implemented and charged all to support the NPA on its CRM campaign.
2715	He said of the 400 provincial licences issued for KwaZulu-Natal hospitals, almost 90% “are sitting with people who don’t have capacity to convert them to businesses”.
2716	He said that being accused of helping your family profit through political prominence by the Trumps “is like being called silly by the Three Stooges.”
2717	He said that better coordination among the forces had become an imperative considering the changing security situation and the changes in technology.
2718	He said that children should participate in other activities along with studies.
2719	He said that the information would be made available in Kannada.
2720	He said that the planned protest would have been an avenue for Nigerians to voice their feelings about the state of things in the country.
2721	He said the articles of impeachment were still being finalized.
2722	He said: 'The disclosure of their criminal records to potential employers has made it more difficult for them to obtain jobs, or may make it more difficult in the future.'
2723	He said the match in Toyota on Saturday, when the typhoon should hit Japan, would not have been cancelled if the All Blacks needed the points to reach the quarters.
2724	He said the next meeting will be held in January 2020.
2725	He said the project would be completed in the stipulated time.
2726	He said the Reserve Bank of India’s disclosure of the bank frauds going up by 74%, totalling Rs 1.74 lakh crore, coincides with almost same amount (Rs 1.75 lakh crore to be exact) transferred by it to the government.
2727	He said there was also undisputed evidence by Pastor Simfukwe that Chikato was living in a house rented by himself as she awaited the purchase of the house, which all pointed to the fact that the former was given the money.
2728	He said the women “are doing it at a very high altitude, an altitude that very few people will ever see.
2729	He said the Yemeni rebel drone attack on the pipeline was carried by out by a “terrorist militia backed by Iran”.
2730	He said they were still learning a lot from New York’s experience.
2731	He said with his wide experience and leadership qualities the political leader could contribute and help strengthen PKR especially in Sabah.
2732	He said, “You're right, this is a terrible world, why not end it?”
2733	“He’s a nice young man who’s doing a great job, and did a great job (at Notre Dame) with their program,” said coach Billy Martin.
2734	He’s an orientation leader and a student ambassador.
2735	He’s a very good guy, I will be rooting for him,” Shevchenko said.
2736	He’s a very tactical coach and I think that’s going to really help me to perfect my positioning.”
2737	He says he is also able to go for a stroll outside by himself because he can map out the streets by looking down and distinguishing light areas from dark.
2738	He says he prefers to find his clothes from locations other than shelters because he doesn’t know where the clothes they distribute have come from.
2739	He says her application for the check is listed as eligible but hasn’t been paid because of an address issue.
2740	He says that if the Conservatives win a majority, he will get Parliament to ratify his Brexit divorce deal and take the U.K. out of the EU by the current Jan.
2741	He's back with the team on the training pitch enjoying his football."
2742	He’s been a great add the last couple of weeks.”
2743	He’s been tested year in, year out -- hundreds of tests, winning every year over this period of 10 years.”
2744	He’s been there his whole life.”
2745	He’s definitely on some mafia payroll.
2746	He seems to fit the bill perfectly as a candidate of the home of “Incurable Tyrants and Kings.”
2747	He served just three weeks of a 10-month sentence in prison, and he also resigned from his job.
2748	He settled in nicely and got them through five innings.”
2749	He’s got a rare blood disease that’s taking a lot out of him, but he’s keeping hope alive with the help of his supportive family.
2750	He’s got some people within the military who are benefiting, but the middle classes are hurting.”
2751	He shares seven insights gleaned from his 48-year career, each one backed up with an interesting anecdote about how he got better at his craft.
2752	He should not put Russia’s interests above that of US.
2753	“He simply didn’t want to tell me,” Naito said.
2754	He’s, I would say, a very refreshing figure in American politics.
2755	“He’s jumping and he’s pulling up well,” Simpson said.
2756	He's literally making the US less safe with his asinine demands for his ineffective wall.
2757	He’s made a lot of friends along the way and we had a very emotional speech from him a few minutes ago.
2758	He’s not triggered, you are and you’re embarrassing yourself and our fellow Lions fans because he’s right about your failed prediction track record on here.
2759	He’s of course unhappy with both major problems, so how to combat them?
2760	He's part of the campus Ducks Unlimited chapter, many of whom hunt together.
2761	Hess (NYSE:HES) last announced its quarterly earnings results on Wednesday, July 31st.
2762	“He’s somebody who has been waiting for his opportunity,” safety Michael Thomas said.
2763	He’s succeeded with some truly terrible quarterbacks, and has been a blessing.
2764	He stepped down from his casino company in February 2018 — shortly after Nielsen was quoted in The Wall Street Journal commenting about employees fears’ of Wynn.
2765	“He’s the guy who makes our lineup go and you’re seeing that right now.
2766	He still doesn’t want me speaking to her even though she and I are 2,000 miles apart.
2767	He’s too old for World of Warcraft and too drunk for the Shoutin’ Happy Mission Ministry.
2768	He stressed: “Kids these days haven’t seen puppets that look like this.
2769	“He’s very warm and easily gets people on his side.”
2770	He taught mathematics, physics, chemistry and geography to students of classes V to XII.
2771	He then posted that email on Twitter.
2772	He then raped and killed her, discarding of her body.
2773	He then sent her disturbing images including a Google Maps image of the victim’s residence.
2774	He therefore urged parents and guardians to assume their rightful responsibilities in nurturing the youth and children of today by instilling discipline, the fear of God and respect for the values of the society in them.
2775	He thinks the Eurosceptic right of the party are a “narcissist delusional subset.”
2776	“He throws it to me in traffic and contested catches, and for him,” Fitzgerald said, via Josh Weinfuss of ESPN.
2777	He told Starbucks barista his name is 'Aziz.'
2778	He told The Guardian: "It’s pretty chaotic out there.
2779	He took this photo of himself at Capitol Reef National Park in Utah this summer.
2780	He used a global subject of black pain as cheap validation for illegality.
2781	He wants to be of service to you and help make your life easier.
2782	He warned the state government not to overtax the people because it wanted to meet revenue target by various agencies and MDAs.
2783	He was also charged this week with failure to comply with recognizance and probation orders.
2784	He was also preceded in death by his wife, Shirley Runette Hambrick Dawson; son, Gregory Ty Dawson; brothers, Earl Dawson, George Dawson, and Steve Dawson.
2785	He was arrested by police officers and beaten, before they took him to a police station in Nasr city and detained him in an overcrowded cell for four weeks.
2786	He was arrested weeks later - on November 28 - and charged on February 15, after he had submitted his resignation to police bosses in December.
2787	He was at the high table during the launch of Team Swapo in 2017 when party leaders such as Jerry Ekandjo, Pendukeni Iivula-Ithana and Nahas Angula kick-started their campaign to challenge Geingob's camp at the party congress that year.
2788	He was at the ward with his mother and 10-week-old sister Ida.
2789	He was a veteran of the United States Air Force and worked for Eastman Chemical Company in Kingsport for 17 years.
2790	He was banned from driving for a year.
2791	He was born on August 7, 1944 in Chicago, IL to the late Charles and Marcella Rogers.
2792	He was born to John T. J. Schou Sr. and Pauline Reisa Phillips Schou.
2793	He was certainly a rival attraction.
2794	He was charged with eight offences, including supply prohibited drug, possess prescribed restricted substance, deal in the proceeds of crime and possess prohibited weapon.
2795	He was fired after he went on air during a "Hockey Night In Canada" broadcast and accused immigrants - who he refers to as, quote, "you people," unquote - of not respecting Canadian military veterans during Remembrance Day celebrations up here.
2796	He was given a suspended sentence then, too, which could be activated by further convictions.
2797	He was introduced by Jay Hansen, President/CEO of the CA Foundation on Environment & the Economy.
2798	He was jailed for five years and nine months, but released from HMP Stafford in May 2017 after serving less than half the sentence.
2799	"He was just to himself," said Archer.
2800	He was much too sharp for World No. 32 Wang Tzu Wei of Chinese Taipei in registering a 21-16 21-11 victory.
2801	He was named Eastern Conference Player Of the Week on November 25th for his efforts, and the Nets are 6-2 with him starting.
2802	He was not a part of the Grand Prix initially but was inserted as an alternate in the event something happens to one of the final four remaining athletes.
2803	He was pitched straight into the Grade 2 Persian War at Chepstow which he took with plenty left.
2804	He was placed under arrest and charged with Breach AVO, Stalking, Act With Intent to Influence Witness, and an outstanding High Range PCA (Prescribed Concentration of Alcohol ).
2805	He was pressed, repeatedly, how he “proposed to get round that”, but refused to say what he would do to avoid the devastating U-turn of asking for Brexit to be delayed.
2806	He was raised there, went to college there, and felt American, but for the fact the United States had a ban on Asian immigrants being naturalized.
2807	He was re-immersed in a familiar role, heavy lifting, with defensive zone starts outnumbering offensive by more than 2:1 (295:136).
2808	He was relieved after the hosts had taken a 4-2 lead, finishing with four hits and five earned runs allowed with two strikeouts and one hit batsman for one inning.
2809	He was right, it was never easy.”
2810	He was sentenced to 30 months in prison and a $100,000 fine.
2811	He was simply replacing one quality player with another.
2812	He was sitting across from Jamie Foxx, whom he calls his best friend and business partner.
2813	He was so shaken by everything that he wouldn’t call again.
2814	He was taken by ambulance to the Civic Campus of The Ottawa Hospital.
2815	He was taken to hospital with non-life-threatening injuries and has since been arrested on suspicion of attempted murder.
2816	He was the Dodgers’ nominee for the Roberto Clemente Award in both 2017 and 2018.
2817	He was there half the night before the police let him make a phone call.
2818	He was treated at the scene and then transported in stable condition to Colleton Medical Center for evaluation.
2819	He was tried for two cases involving the sexual assault of two young girls between 5 and 10 years old.
2820	He went on to describe his troubled childhood and told how he went to bed hungry because his family was poor.
2821	He went out to the Bonneville Salt Flats and was surprised by all the dust and salt that ended up sticking to him.
2822	He went undrafted out of Eastern Michigan in April.
2823	He will have no answer but questions like that will fly as Depeffle aims for hard Brexit.
2824	He will now manage all of Hudson’s commercial auto business, including both its direct underwriting and delegated underwriting authority business.
2825	He will report to both Mike St. Peter, president and general manager of NBC10 (WBTS), Telemundo Boston (WNEU) and cable news network NECN, and Ted Griggs, president, group leader and strategic production & programming, NBC Sports Regional Networks.
2826	He will then spend the remainder of the week with them attending briefings with the media and politicians.
2827	He will then unveil a three-country Queen’s Commonwealth Canopy project for the Okavango Delta, with representatives from Angola, Botswana and Namibia.
2828	He won't be the featured back until he earns it.
2829	He worked with Cage again when he portrayed the the father of the actor's character in the 2015 Louisiana political drama The Runner.
2830	“He would give verbal or physical instructions about what could be answered … what story we could tell or what part of captivity we could talk about,” said Coleman.
2831	He would have condemned John the Baptist and the Apostle Paul as proselytes, it sounds like.
2832	He would like to continue the projects he’s already started.
2833	“He writes down everything.
2834	Heydorn’s Analysis: There you have it.
2835	Hey you got to stiggit right?
2836	Hiding them in the pre-show doesn’t equal representation, and all the made-up categories in the world won’t change that.
2837	Highland Capital Management LLC now owns 18,481 shares of the technology retailer’s stock valued at $1,313,000 after buying an additional 2,025 shares in the last quarter.
2838	High-limit salon on the second floor of the casino.
2839	Highs in the Central Valley will be in the upper 60s to low 70s with light winds.
2840	Hikers conquered the 15 kilometre mountain trek, painting the mountain scene pink in their outfits in support of Breast Cancer Awareness Month.
2841	Hinjili, which falls under Aska Lok Sabha constituency, is slated to go to polls in the second part of four-phase elections in Odisha.
2842	His appeal was denied for the 17th time.
2843	“His basses were often pinstriped and had flames on them, graphics on them, all kinds of crazy stuff,” he said.
2844	His bones jut violently through his thin, papery skin, his frail body cradled in a hammock outside his hut.
2845	“His brothers who should have helped him were not around, but he managed to help himself out of the compound with blood gushing out from the knife wound.
2846	His call is effectual in the manifestation of his loveliness.
2847	His campaign called off appearances in South Carolina last month in the wake of a Democratic primary debate where his voice sounded strained.
2848	His career is finished, so he should be speaking out at the ridiculousness of the rule banning marijuana.
2849	His cheapness has been common knowledge for years, but recently some of the insidious spirit behind it came to light.
2850	“His energy and enthusiasm for the game, and for the student-athletes he coaches, are infectious.
2851	His Excellency Francisco Bernales conveyed greetings to the people of Saint Lucia from the President of the Republic of Chile, His Excellency, Sebastien Pinera.
2852	His ex often turns up here uninvited.
2853	His eyesight wasn't as clear as it could have been, but he thought what he saw was normal.'
2854	“His family don’t want him to fight me again and I understand, they shouldn’t.
2855	His favorite composition, and that which is unmistakably a Parker artwork, involves the tall trees which formerly graced an area of Maxwell Village, then known as Maxwell Farm; it later became Lucky’s.
2856	His four shot winning margin, thanks to rounds of 68 and 72, doesn’t tell the full story as he nearly withdrew after 11 holes.
2857	His funeral is set for Tuesday.
2858	His idea is not to follow a recipe, but simply to respond to what he perceives the vineyard wants.
2859	“His job as the supervisor is to go to the scene and secure the scene.
2860	His latest tantrum, entirely the result of his own sloppiness, this Ukraine fiasco, is making friend and foe alike very concerned and upset.
2861	His lies are constant, many of them are childish in nature.
2862	His medical records first noted his dependence on drugs in 1990.
2863	His mother was last year to have died in 2014, and in the wake of the high-profile murder of Kim Jong Un’s half-brother Kim Jong Nam in Malaysia in 2017, South Korean media that Czech authorities had stepped-up their protection of the ambassador.
2864	His new career will combine his experience as a healthcare administrator – and as a practicing physician – to guide other hospitals and systems as a healthcare consultant.
2865	His pair of New Balance Made in U.S. 997s ring in at just over $200 — basically the antithesis of Crocs.
2866	His parents split.
2867	“His pledge to support any of these clowns for president is a reminder that Doug Jones will put his party and their socialist agenda ahead of the principles and priorities of Alabama voters.”
2868	His recent video highlighting the bad condition of the Central Market Road by showing a “moon walk” went viral on the social media.
2869	His sister Brooke said: “I just want to say thank you to everyone that has done everything for Josh the last four years.
2870	His speech to conference reflected all his wit, brilliance and showmanship.
2871	His strategy was neither reckless nor stupid.
2872	"His style is very much that when he's under pressure, he tends to be calmer."
2873	His supporters have welcomed the move.
2874	Historian notes that evidence presented against female defendants took on a distinctively gendered tone.
2875	Historic City News was notified by Florida Department of Transportation Public Information Officer, Allen Nelson, that traffic will be impacted at the following St Augustine and St Johns County locations where roadwork is being conducted.
2876	His torso is horribly scarred; burned, almost.
2877	History is a hit or miss thing in our country.
2878	History TV Show Ratings (updated 4/30/19) - canceled TV shows - TV Series FinaleCancelled or Renewed?
2879	His trainer, Nicky Henderson, continued his excellent recent form by winning the first two races here.
2880	His trial had been set for Nov. 12, but was pushed back to give expert witnesses more time to review new evidence.
2881	His vision is to use the game to inspire empathy for refugees.
2882	Hit the link to read more.
2883	HKMAO's comments echo those of the city's chief executive Carrie Lam in at a closed-door meeting last week.
2884	Hollering at the photographers is not going to solve the problem, though.
2885	Hollywood’s China reckoning has come.
2886	Holmes ensures strategic air defense forces are ready to meet the challenges of peacetime air sovereignty and wartime defense.
2887	Home affordability in Longmont was responsible for the higher number of sales in that community, Gullette said.
2888	Homebuilders put postage stamps on bricks and on 2-by-4 wooden planks and mailed them to the Fed to protest how super-high interest rates had wrecked their businesses.
2889	“Homelessness in California is a crisis, as it is in many other areas of the country,” she added, “and it demands action from federal, state and local government.
2890	Homes and businesses in rural areas across the county, from Rathvilly to Borris and from Oldleighlin to Ardattin can now join the thousands who are now connecting.
2891	Honestly, I am amazed that into so many theaters, knowing how hotly opposed this movie will be.
2892	“Honestly, I’m kind of glad I’m not the SID anymore because that responsibility has become extremely intensified,” Moth says.
2893	“Honestly, just organization, just having a planner, keeping everything in line, making sure you know where you’re going to be at this time, when you have to turn in an assignment, what time coach Grady wants you to be at school for soccer,” Garcia said.
2894	Honestly, please don’t!
2895	Honestly, sometimes even the main characters themselves wound up being the bad guys.
2896	HONG KONG — Police say charges will be filed against Hong Kong teenager who was shot by police during pro-democracy protests.
2897	Hon. Penn explained during a public meeting held on 11 September that the PAC’s constitution required a Standing Orders amendment.
2898	Hon. Tonye Emmanuel Isenah said, “Is good to start like this, whoever that wins will have a robust relationship with the house so that the assembly can function.”
2899	Hopefully England can win it all!
2900	Hopefully, that would support getting more people into our rural communities that are willing to practice.”
2901	“Hopefully, they learned their lesson and they won’t behave like that.
2902	Hopefully, this struggle of theirs will be beneficial to them in the end.
2903	Hopefully, we'll learn more about what those future projects are soon, but in the meantime, we want to give a shoutout and a thank you to Casentini for all the work he's put in on the franchise, and we can't wait to see what's next.
2904	Hope Mr Eddy can get things straightened out.
2905	Hope nobody drinks Espresso, because any machine with a brass boiler would need to carry a prop 65 logo.
2906	“Hope that will be doable.
2907	Hope this helped you.
2908	Hori’s Split Pad Pro is what happens when ideas like “small” and “sleek” and “not ridiculous” are tossed out the window.
2909	Horns, for example, give “Blood of the Lamb” its R&B punch while an organ imparts “Body of Mine” with a mysterious vibe and strings give ballad “Cold Baby” a retro 1960’s pop feel.
2910	Horrifying video shows inmates brutally beating and.
2911	Host cities will begin orientation for volunteers in February and will begin training in June ahead of the tournament's opening in September.
2912	Hostile regimes were replaced by friendlier ones to the USA but the elusive peace and security, let alone democracy, never set in. And as it appears, such goals were not even planned or intended by the US-led invaders.
2913	Hours after the fatal shooting, the Guyana Police Force issued a wanted bulletin for the suspect, who has been identified as Keon David, 32, an ex-member of the force and also a resident of Sophia.
2914	House Democrats would almost certainly reject any plans to simply deport unaccompanied minors or otherwise rewrite the law governing asylum or family detentions that they see as protecting young migrants who are often fleeing difficult conditions.
2915	Houston had a chance for the win, but Deshaun Watson’s desperation throw as time expired was knocked down in the end zone by Reid.
2916	HOUSTON, Texas (KTRK) -- A neighborhood in which a 9-year-old boy was shot in a drive-by shooting remains in disbelief.
2917	How about a fresh start for your love life.
2918	Howard Schultz, another business-minded former Democrat who’s now weighing an independent bid for president, also declined to comment.
2919	How can a possible breakthrough in Saudi Arabia and Qatar relation affect the Tehran-Doha relation?
2920	How can I respond to those who are unhappy with their weight without sounding insincere?
2921	How Can I Save Money as a College Student?
2922	“How can we trust the inquiry?
2923	How can you talk about prevention unless these things are actually being reported?
2924	“How crazy is that?
2925	How Did Magikarp Evolve Into Gyarados?
2926	How did you change the program, and how did it change you?
2927	How did you deal with that?
2928	How do I live stream Pakistan vs Australia 1st T20I?
2929	How do I protect my creative work?
2930	How Do the Chemicals in Sunscreen Protect Our Skin From Damage?
2931	However, according to ZimStat, the Zimbabwe Revenue Authority (Zimra), which is the source of merchandise trade data, has not provided figures for December 2017 and January 2018.
2932	However, a few minutes latter, I saw another couple, both men, walking towards the same table where the previous couple was sitting.
2933	However, a leading charity said the research, although promising, was too preliminary to get excited.
2934	However, a medical examination couldn’t prove that Tilby’s rolling over Darian caused his death.
2935	However apt the description, decisions about any of the injured players will likely be complicated by the fact that the Eagles will turn around and play the Packers on Thursday night in Week Four.
2936	However, a revelation shown in episode seven completely changed my views of the character.
2937	However, aside from decorating the house and listening to Christmas music on loop, this year truly embrace the season with your loved ones and entire community with some local Christmas events.
2938	However Chris Walker, regional managing editor for Reach’s North West and Wales division, remained upbeat about the prospects of the site and its sister print titles.
2939	However, due to an intense police patrol within the general area, 10 of the victims were rescued and reunited with their families.
2940	However, even these third-party pricing providers run into issues with accuracy around pricing bonds that not only trade OTC but may not have traded for a period of time.
2941	However, franchise owners Deccan Chronicle Holdings failed to deliver and the team was ejected from the league.
2942	However, he said he was assured by a group of dedicated and committed police officers that they would work towards reducing criminality in the area and that he had encouraged them to continue to serve the people of the area.
2943	However, he said the date of commencement of the VAT on online transactions would be subject to government’s approval.
2944	However, his ideals are tested when his lovely queen, Guinevere, falls in love with the young knight Lancelot, and the fate of the kingdom hangs in the balance.
2945	However, I believe that the Nonkanyiso Mabaleka brand can never be separated from the Christian element.
2946	However if Instagram is anything to go by he's performed another u-turn and is back with his ex.
2947	However I’m also able to watch additional live content from other channels including Comedy Central, MTV, National Geographic and Gold on a smart device.
2948	However, in an environment of low financial literacy, many of those using digital credit products don’t fully understanding their rights and obligations as consumers, and sometimes fall victim to predatory practices.
2949	However, incorrect claims for the tax credits are currently leading to a backlog of claims being processed by the Revenue Commissioners.
2950	However, in Nigeria, and many other sub-Saharan African countries, the transmission mechanism through which this occurs is quite weak.
2951	However, intermittency and fluctuations in renewable power generation, challenges associated with the use of hybrid power systems, and grid integration challenges may hamper the growth of the hybrid power systems industry over the forecast period.
2952	“However, it is important to remember that even in those trials a few patients had responded, including some with durable responses.
2953	However, it is their departure to the other world which has exposed most of them for their planning boobs.
2954	However, it lowered its margin guidance for its IT services business in the range of $2,047 million to $2,088 million, which translates to a sequential growth of 0.0% to 2.0%.
2955	However, it must be pointed out that these pioneering humorists will not be the first clowns in space.
2956	However, it was further postponed following cyclone Fani that barrelled through coastal districts.
2957	However, it was Wimbledon who made the perfect start to the half as Wagstaff got in on the act again and poked home Appiah’s cross.
2958	“However, I’ve seen how some other governments have handled that option and I did not feel it appropriate I put our School Board in that position.”
2959	However, I was not going to retaliate.
2960	However, Jihoon was on his way to the United States and was so excited to finally meet his baby.
2961	However, Mac says she doesn’t like Colby that way and reveals she only came to Summer Bay to get to know Dean.
2962	However, more stubble burning cases were recorded this time as compared to last year despite a strict enforcement,” Mr. Sisodia’s letter said.
2963	However, Nike have now created separate home and away kits specifically for the women to wear in France as they look to better their run to the semi-finals of four years ago.
2964	However, not everything originally in the script will make it to the big screen this weekendCinemaBlend’s exclusive interview with Millie Bobby Brown, the young actress revealed one cut scene she was sad to see not make the theatrical release.
2965	However, one person who is not into "Reylo" is herself.
2966	However, on January 15, 2018, another two Moroccan women died while several others suffered injuries in a stampede at one of the ’s crossing borders.
2967	However, otherwise that?
2968	However, over the years, our lands, air and sea have been highly polluted by the activities of the oil industry, especially old pipes, sabotage and oil theft.
2969	However, Paxful is actively trying new technologies and procedures to increase security and reduce the risk associated with gift card trades.
2970	However, pollsters could have conducted surveys last week and then released them this past weekend — yet none did.
2971	However, results were generally neutral as new drilling also indicated that the granite is deeper and lower-grade at the northern edge.
2972	However, Ruiz Jr hit out at Hearn and Joshua after hearing the news, saying: “I’m not going to the UK for the rematch.”
2973	However school was not an interest for Vision, dropping out just before receiving writing scholarships, to pursue his career as a recording artist and music executive.
2974	However, security forces tightly control crowds that assemble on other days.
2975	However, she said the military was prepared for "any external attacks."
2976	However, some of the Junglers’ victims said the government was making a big mess that they would live to regret.
2977	However, someone from his camp has come out to debunk the rumour that housemate Mike is rich.
2978	However Spectral Edge also says that its system can bring improvements when implemented in software alone.
2979	However, Strange's most taxing challenge is unfolding in the Mystical Realm at present, linking past connections he never thought he'd see again.
2980	However, talks between Duff's camp and Disney stalled and the series was never made.
2981	However, that 4% is still clicking, even after training.
2982	However, that also comes with two issues.
2983	However, that means “the insight and protection that an agency can sometimes offer” are missing, making young women more vulnerable.
2984	However, the frost put paid to this one too.
2985	However, the Gambian Daily Observer was shutdown in 2017 by the current Gambian government on account of unpaid taxes incurred by military dictator Jammeh who had deported Mr. Best and taken possession of the newspaper.
2986	However, their evil reign together doesn’t last very long.
2987	However, the Kombat Pack promised us a total of six kombatants indicating there were still two characters to be announced.
2988	However, the library was in some way lucky.
2989	However, the NCAA does not allege any recruiting violations against Boynton or Oklahoma State.
2990	However, the new embargo is able to target transaction of humanitarian goods including food and medicine, some express worry.
2991	However, the overall voter turnout was 6.3 per cent lower than that of the general election of July 25, 2018.
2992	However, there have been signs of rapprochement, leading to speculation that the estranged allies might forge a pre-poll alliance.
2993	However, the volunteers were stood down en route, after being told the casualty was safely in the care of ambulance staff.
2994	However, things are quite different if you’re a bride who is going to be on Say Yes to the Dress.
2995	However, this is an assumption that must be tested observationally.
2996	However, this is breathtakingly political from the Bungie chief’ee Mukuni.
2997	However, under 400 MBTs have been delivered to date.
2998	However, we do not expect a re-rating given tough market conditions in China, risks to demand from a no-deal Brexit, weak premium demand in other markets and negative FCF for JLR until FY21F.
2999	However, when Ultimate Nick Fury was created by Brian Michael Bendis and Mike Allred in 2001, he was patterned exactly after Samuel L. Jackson.
3000	However, while there are regular budgetary allocations for TB, there are none for leprosy, otherwise known as Hansen’s disease.
3001	How far would you go to prevent tragedy?
3002	How has Cigna’s Net Income and EPS trended?
3003	How I pity these women.
3004	How is the offensive developing?
3005	How is this missionary-oriented faith faring in its efforts to recruit and retain members?
3006	How many satellites has India launched?
3007	"How much more evidence do people need that this man should not be anywhere near the Oval Office?"
3008	How much progress have we made?
3009	How popular is the Mile High Club?
3010	Howser visited the museum 15 years ago when the famous Big Boy was still there.
3011	How to deal with Israel?
3012	How would the city prevent electric scooter history from repeating itself?
3013	Hrithik is absolutely brilliant.
3014	HS Prannoy put up a good fight against top seed Kento Momota but eventually lost by 21-19, 21-12 in 56 minutes.
3015	“Huge love shown at the end when he tosses some back.”
3016	Humanitarian organizations have criticized Greece for not doing enough to improve living conditions at its camps, which they have described as "shameful".
3017	Human Retrovirus Section, Vaccine Branch, National Cancer Institute at Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702.
3018	HUNDREDS of entries continue to stream in for the Eyethu Bay Watch’s Read to Lead competition.
3019	Hundreds of people have died in similar accidents in recent years in Africa’s largest oil producer as impoverished people risk their lives to collect fuel leaking from pipelines or trucks.
3020	Hundreds of volunteers have searched for her since.
3021	Hunger or no Hunger Hichilema is not winning in 2021.
3022	Hunter Biden, "through his attorney", or as "his attorney George Mesires said in a statement".
3023	Hunter Mefford, Matthew Williams and Foster Mefford each canned a bucket as the Rebels got out to a 6-0 start in the first quarter and built up a double-digit lead by the midway point of the second quarter.
3024	Huntington National Bank bought a new stake in Argo Group in the second quarter valued at $36,000.
3025	Huobi Token (HT) traded up 2.1% against the dollar and now trades at $1.12 or 0.00027441 BTC.
3026	Hurricane season lasts until November 30th.
3027	H.” (who had made four trips to Colorado with Gerald Holmes), to purchase greater quantities of marijuana per trip.
3028	I adored the story of “Cinderella” as a child.
3029	“I adore it, but my poor millennial wallet does not!”
3030	I agree it’s a total joke to get paid 7 days after your work.
3031	I already have a part-time job.
3032	I also believe that the university and Athletics department should issue statements of apology that reflect a critical interaction with the institution’s privilege and our relationship to San Antonio,” Bourgeouis said.
3033	I also don’t appreciate being called a bully simply for insisting on my full humanity and refusing to “capitulate” to anyone who sees me as less than.
3034	I also have a blog.
3035	I also want to make new members feel welcome.
3036	I always enjoy a good Prime Rib at Guard & Grace when I am in Denver.
3037	I am a recovering investment banker, community college teacher and social entrepreneur who co-founded Decision Fish LLC in 2016 to help people make better decisions.
3038	"I am currently speaking to my legal advisers in relation to lodging a damages claim in the vicinity of $5 million upwards as a result of this decision."
3039	I am eager to help discover the answer to this important question,” Dunn said.
3040	“I am excited about the prospect of walking into Aberdeen Anarchy as the defending Undisputed champion when my opponent is a guy it took me two minutes to beat at the Regal Rumble.”
3041	I am impressed by the commitment the institution shows in empowering the rural and under-privileged youth by providing state of art technical education.
3042	I am not sure the ORP has the time or the money.
3043	I am not sure whether all the countries realise the gravity of the situation if there is a conflict with Iran," Mr Khan said in response to a question during his appearance at the US Institute of Peace, a think-tank funded by the US Congress.
3044	I am out here hoping that the president can see that persons outside a political alignment are calling on him to set an election date,” she said.
3045	I am pleased that the Department for Children and Families is providing direct funding to schools for the coming year to ensure they receive the funds they’re counting on.”
3046	“I am pleased to announce the Bristol Sports Hall of Fame Class of 2019,” Hall of Fame president Bob Kalat said.
3047	"I am proud of the work I do," she says.
3048	I am proud to be a millennial.
3049	I AM starting to look forward to an autumn general election.
3050	I am sure that all the chosen players will be able to make the utmost effort to continue our march.”
3051	I am sure you will find the information in the public domain that can edify you as to where is APNU+AFC.
3052	I am talking about re-education and taking the time to say to the current male workforce that having a work life balance is okay; job sharing and working flexibly is not just okay but you will enjoy it.
3053	I am the City of Monticello.
3054	‘I am the IGP for this country, not political parties’
3055	I am truly excited to see what she will bring to the table.
3056	I am used to disappointments, cheating, bad treatment, all kinds of guys but I chose to give you love.
3057	‘I am warning that there will be consequences if the turbines are built,’ he added.
3058	“I am writing with more than a tinge of jealousy, to wish you the very best of luck ahead of your audacious attempt to circumnavigate the globe in our most iconic and evocative aircraft,” he said.
3059	Ian Bullis placed on the Special Fire Commission agenda to approve the counter offer of general terms to the City of Ely for a contract/interlocal agreement to provide fire protection services within the White Pine County Fire Protection District.
3060	Ian Wright is the latest star hinted to be making an appearance, with Match Of The Day host Gary Lineker dropping blatant clues left, right and centre about the star’s possible debut during last weekend’s episode.
3061	“I apologize to my colleagues in the PDP for the manner I left,” the lawmaker said at the 8th Senate valedictory session in Abuja on Wednesday.
3062	“I applaud President Trump’s FCC Chairman for securing significant commitments from these companies to boost wireless coverage in rural areas like West Virginia.”
3063	I asked the Minister for clarification about this during the debate on Wednesday, but he didn’t answer me, so you can bet that I’ll be writing to him to chase up this point.
3064	I ask them why they were pleased about the arrests.
3065	I became obsessed to the point of unhinged about their new dating lives, in which all sex is plentiful, on-demand, available, and when it comes to romance, all the rules are off and also all “The Rules” are off.
3066	I begged you for N5,000, before making it N15,000.”
3067	I believe Bill B. and the Pats though.
3068	I believed in trust and the times that people said, “I love you.”
3069	I believe the defining characteristic that draws people to the game is the freedom to play the game as you see fit.
3070	I belong to 3 not for profit charities and fraternal groups and all have fallen prey to the fear of being sued.
3071	I bet Budget Direct insurance premiums are cheaper than the policies many of us have kept for years.
3072	I bet she ain’t never had a boyfriend like him.
3073	I bet you’ll see things moderate, once we’re down to four or six survivors.
3074	I can appear before God with my debt paid in full or bear the consequences myself.
3075	“I can ask him ‘what did you do?’ or ‘what can I do?’
3076	I can just do that without actually having to exploit Windows or anything.
3077	I cannot comment on the facts of the case.
3078	I can ride a snowmobile out in the middle of nowhere and get stranded too; that's why I don't ride snowmobiles around for recreation.
3079	I can’t believe they have people making millions of dollars as consultants who can’t figure this out.
3080	'I can't predict how that vote will go tomorrow but I suspect the Prime Minister will lose and I suspect we'll be facing a general election probably to take place on October 14.
3081	I can’t remember who I first heard say it.
3082	I can't wait for "More Could Fall IV", I hear Spielberg is directing.
3083	“I can understand the commercial or the political reasons for why they don’t want to go that way,” said Edwards.
3084	Icelanders believe in their ‘hidden people’ of elves, trolls and ghosts.
3085	I chose to drink because it was a Band-Aid.
3086	“I come off the field, I look into the crowd and I can barely see an empty seat,” Ben Pinto told Hearst Connecticut Media shortly after the final play.
3087	I could never have asked for a better teacher or a better friend.”
3088	“I couldn’t believe my eyes!”
3089	I couldn't take over the part from an actor I'd known didn't approve of me.
3090	Ideas were aimed at making more walkable and pedestrian-friendly communities, creating new infrastructure and amenities and stimulating development in the downtown area.
3091	I’d have already said to Dennis, ‘Put it in to my left, because I’m going to run him over to the right.’
3092	“I’d have to go out and buy and a new car, pay insurance for that car, and also pay for parking.”
3093	I did not mention intelligence not because it is not important, but because it is less important than the other attributes I have mentioned.
3094	“I didn’t buy into that.
3095	“I didn’t know about Anna,” Oddy said.
3096	I didn’t print this confidential information before it became public because my word is my bond.”
3097	'I did their nails that morning, which was on a Monday.
3098	I did this survey a long, very long time in the past, so I thought I’d give it another go!
3099	Idlet agrees, saying what he and Grimwood do “musically and vocally together is pretty special.”
3100	I’d like to know how much time they plan to spend as a City Councilmember on Federal politics.
3101	“I do believe native rights have to be respected.
3102	"I do find it quite entertaining," Patttinson says, chuckling.
3103	I do not think they are an empty gesture.
3104	I don’t believe in telling people they can’t do something if they’re not harming anyone else.
3105	I don’t care to know him,” Lowry said.
3106	I don’t care what you think of the film, misogyny or the interview,” said the Telugu star.
3107	“I don’t do match predictions but feel Lawrence Shankland will progress to being a Scotland legend.”
3108	I don’t fit into that mold.”
3109	“I don’t know anything about what they’re looking for.
3110	I don’t know if that’s going to work.”
3111	I don’t know what his role is these days.
3112	“I don’t know what we can do next because you fundraise your people to death,” she said.
3113	I don’t know why we’ve never done anything about her birthplace,” said Democratic Rep. Patricia Roybal Caballero.
3114	I don’t own a gun.
3115	“I don’t really know how I became a Leafs fan,” Justin said.
3116	"I don’t really know what job I’m going to do next, which is very exciting.
3117	I don’t really think anybody can say for sure," manager Rocco Baldelli said.
3118	I dont really think he is that fringe or outlier.
3119	I don’t recall my reply, but I know that I answered abruptly and uncleverly, and then the interview was over.
3120	“I don’t think now is the best time for me to visit,” O’Regan said, noting he will take the lead from the community on when it might be appropriate to come to the community.
3121	“I don’t think people understand the implication of having a budget that is signed into law half way into the year.
3122	“I don’t think we can raise $2,800 to repair the roof,” said Herrera.
3123	I don’t want to be anything less than the guy at the top.
3124	“I don’t want to be not as good as I was two years ago.”
3125	I don't want to hang out with him.'
3126	I don’t want to say which.
3127	I’d probably err slightly on the side of gentle deflection here, rather than: “Janet, I’m thrilled about your new baby, but these updates are a bit too much for me.
3128	I drove from Illinois to Arizona just last week.
3129	I encourage everyone I know to at least look into some form of basic meditation.
3130	I even took my recycling to the town dump in the Urus.
3131	If 218 out of the 435 House members vote in favour of any of the impeachment articles, Trump will become the third president in US history to be impeached – Andrew Johnson and Bill Clinton being the others.
3132	“If a chance to win a trophy is a distraction, then this is a pretty good distraction,” added Milner.
3133	If Adler wanted "capacity" or "growth", he would have dumped his $175 million into WeWork.
3134	If, after 21 days, this effort also fails, Rivlin would initiate a process leading to new elections.
3135	If after the 360 there is no conversation, it’s worthless.
3136	If agents with the county’s Child Welfare Services had planned on swooping in to protect the children, as Otay Water District board member Hector Gastelum had on social media urged them to do, they would have been too late.
3137	If Brooke finds out that Ridge had been with Shauna, his marriage may be over.
3138	If Durant does go to the Knicks, East says that his former teammate is built to withstand the commentary from the social media trolls.
3139	I feel incredibly blessed to be a part of.
3140	I feel like I haven’t been in this role since college,” Cracraft said.
3141	“I feel like not enough students really realize what it is and the experience it is,” Pfundt said.
3142	“I feel like the minimum wage needs to be higher.
3143	“I felt angry and sad,” he said during the march.
3144	I felt it was important to bring this matter before the board and proceed with dismissing Mr. Ellison,” said Keck.
3145	“I felt like he got another good one to hit today and put it on the net again.
3146	“I felt like these were really true people speaking the truth,” Underwood said.
3147	“If existing gene editing approaches are ‘scissors’ for the genome, our base editors are ‘pencils,’ erasing and rewriting one letter in the gene,” Beam says in its IPO prospectus.
3148	"If Gor Mahia wishes to listen to me, I'm ready to consult with my lawyer and my agent who is my brother so as to resolve this issue before it gets to the tribunal.
3149	If he can show he is continuing treatment at the same facility they can possibly have him pardoned; they allow him to see Dr. Patterson who can evaluate him.
3150	If Her Hair Was Still Red, I take a look at all of Mary Jane Watson's comic book appearances in chronological order (by date of publication).
3151	If he's paid his debt to society and doesn't pose a danger anymore, then he definitely deserves an opportunity to have a real job and be miserable like normal people.
3152	If he wants a new message placed on a shirt, he informs Ravens equipment manager William Sheridan, who promptly gets it done.
3153	If Hope expects to share custody of his son, Thomas will maintain that he needs proof of a possible future together.
3154	If I’m going to play a standard or something like that night after night, as soon as you start re-harmonizing stuff, now it becomes a rigid original.
3155	‘If I miss a day of practice, I know it.
3156	“If I missed it, I would have been pissed at myself, so I just got it right in the goal.”
3157	I find her house surrounded by police cars.
3158	I find Kanye’s lyrical mastery similar to some of my favorite artists, namely Logic and A Tribe Called Quest.
3159	I find myself looking at other women but I don’t want to be unfaithful.
3160	If it continues to work, the Oilers will make the playoffs.
3161	“If I then sat and felt sorry for myself, that wasn’t going to help me.
3162	If it’s a colleague, for instance, they will point out the smallest flaws at work.
3163	"If it weren't for DACA I don't know where I would be."
3164	If Kawhi leaves, the Raptors are likely looking at a zombie season and then quite possibly a painful rebuild coming off a title.
3165	If Kuzma makes the World Cup Roster — admittedly a bit of a long shot — he would be the first Laker to make the final cut to a World Cup or Olympics team since Kobe Bryant in 2012.
3166	If Labour does poorly this election, they’re going to lose their ‘u’.
3167	I flew to Scotland with a hoodie on, I hid at my dad’s house for three days with the blinds closed, snuck to the gym at the cover of night, and showed up in the ring to give the promo that really kick-started everything.”
3168	If Mr. Walker didn’t know them when the night started, he did before it was over.
3169	If Mutati had concerns about Nevers Mumba, he had channels to use within the MMD structures.
3170	IF not for physicality we would have been out…but we are top of our group…does that add up…?
3171	"If not, then it's not repelling."
3172	“If one does come through, we will consider it at this time,” she said.
3173	If, on the other hand, Richmond can have sustained drives that end in points, limit turnovers and prevent big plays from Hough it could be a long ride home to Cornelius.
3174	“If other people asked, I would just say I am the director’s graduate student, but most people didn’t ask,” said one on condition of anonymity for fear of retribution.
3175	If our father dies I'm holding you responsible Meg!
3176	If people don’t have living-wage jobs, their energy is focused on staying afloat and maintaining their housing rather than healthy living, said David Hudson, Healthy Communities programs manager at Clark County Public Health.
3177	If possible, visit them for examination operations.
3178	If senior forward Seamus Malone comes up with two points this week he will reach the 100-mark, becoming the 74th Badger in school history.
3179	If she has the support of one-third of Minnesotans, that alone could be enough for her to reach the 0.5 percent she would need to hit 1 percent in a national poll, since poll results are typically rounded up to the nearest whole number.
3180	“If she’s falsely accused, then it’s horrible.
3181	If someone were to ask what the hardest costume in Skyrim is to replicate, then we would have a very clear answer ready for you: the Daedric Armor. It's without a doubt the coolest looking one of all available armors, and also the best there is available.
3182	If something critical in a game is unclear to a person that plays as many games as a reviewer, remember that onboarding & tutorialization are OUR job.
3183	If stress is an issue (and it always is), consider resiliency training.
3184	If successful, data storage equipment and the general processing of information could end up operating through high-speed, high-power molecular switches.
3185	If that doesn’t succeed, a quick bipartisan vote would come after Congress returns next month from its Memorial Day recess.
3186	If that makes you want to ask a lot of questions, then you are going to be confused for most of this anime.
3187	If that suggested a certain insouciance then Bournemouth brilliantly shook him from him as, deep into first-half injury time, they hit back after a free-kick was won and Harry Wilson stood over it.
3188	If the 2005 spills had not been signed over to LOSCO, assessing them would likely have fallen to Henry’s group.
3189	If the candidates delay, their efforts will be perceived by the youth as self-serving.
3190	If the Chiefs are able to steal two of these next four games, certainly a chance to win 11 games is in the cards and this Chiefs team could competefor a first round bye to boot.
3191	If the government insists on moving ahead with its plans, Greek President Prokopis Pavlopoulos will be called upon to sign the relevant presidential decree.
3192	“If the leader doesn’t want to go again, that’s a break of that bond.
3193	“If the manager decides that he wants to use me as a midfielder, centre-back or striker, that is where I will play.
3194	If the new film can balance an ensemble cast, violence, and story it will be an interesting reboot.
3195	If the Patriots had a tight end on injured reserve who was selected in the first round of the 2019 NFL Draft, you don’t think we’d all be projecting him as a Week 9 starter?
3196	If there are no takers, this match will go to extra-time and then penalties if needed.
3197	If the relationship you describe was between boyfriend and girlfriend instead of two friends, it would be like coercive control (now a criminal offence).
3198	“If the resort had been built at any other time, it might have stood a chance.”
3199	If there was ever a time for the Academy to recognize a movie that challenged preconceived notions about race, the LGBTQ community, or any other misunderstood group, now was it.
3200	If these cops can’t figure out a way to their jobs while respecting the will of the people, then quit and let someone else do it.
3201	“If the sex offender moves, we know it because we have someone checking on them,” he said.
3202	If they bring the right person in, this can still be a good season, we're only three games in.
3203	If they died carrying out their mission, they would be rewarded with even greater delights in the afterlife.
3204	If they do have food orders from the pub, he said it’s been easy to fulfill the bowls orders as they don't disrupt or push back other orders.
3205	"If they don't see those complaints being addressed then they are not going to come forward," said Ms Greiner, who is separated from Nick Greiner but is still close to the Liberal Party president.
3206	If they had been starting there instead of Clowney, that’s going to tell a much different story for Seattle.
3207	If US truly believe in peace and denuclearization, US must get rid of all its nukes to be the true moral leader that truly has credibility for all others to follow to rid of all their nukes.
3208	If we can do that, then we all have confidence in ourselves to succeed.”
3209	If Weibo was a public square, WeChat was a walled garden.
3210	“If we rely on reason alone, life seems pointless,” she said by phone from her London home.
3211	If you are a resident, please take a few minutes to complete the Human Trafficking and Child Exploitation Survey at https://www.
3212	If you are composing a complaint letter, you must be special regarding this clear answer.
3213	If you are in a dilemma and don’t know which player to start at a position, my advice would be to go with the player that is higher in the rankings.
3214	If you are not for impeachment, you don’t care about the Constitution,’” she said, according to an aide in the room.
3215	If you are viewing this piece of content on another website, it was illegally stolen and reposted in violation of U.S. and international copyright & trademark law.
3216	If you break the law, I’ll hold you accountable,” he says.
3217	If you brought a mini fridge to campus this year, you’re in luck.
3218	If you didn’t pass, don’t despair.
3219	“If you do not have a will you will not be able to benefit non-relatives, even if they meant the world to you.
3220	If you don’t think you’re complete, then that thought exists, and thus is valid.
3221	"If you eat an apple, for example, you’re not only getting the calories from that apple—you’re getting cholesterol-helping fiber along with lots of vitamins and minerals.
3222	If you feel generous enough to pay, who am I to judge?
3223	If you feel off, then don’t make anything out of it.
3224	If you feel you are emotionally unhealthy, get help from a professional.
3225	If you felt a disturbance in the Force on Monday night — as if millions of people suddenly rushed to YouTube — it's because the final trailer for Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker was released.
3226	If you have any information about this accident, call the Bibb Sheriff’s Office at 478-751-7500.
3227	If you have any information about what happened, call the Crime Line at 1-888-LOCK-U-UP (1-888-562-5887).
3228	If you have any leads detectives want to hear from you.
3229	“If you have grandkids you’ll see how important they are to an old guy’s life,” Ojala, 77, said.
3230	If you haven’t previously published a letter prior to a ways that is superior to start may be to attempt to obtain an example condolence letter that can help you to grasp the tone and also the arrangement your correspondence should take.
3231	“If you haven’t watched wrestling in 20 years, this is the time to start watching it.
3232	If you look at the ChenMed example, they take all the downstream financial risk of the patient.
3233	If your application is rejected by recipients before scanning it all of your work will be wasted.
3234	If you’re 70 percent healthy, you’re 100 percent.
3235	If you're a fan of the hip-hop musical "Hamilton," you know today's guest, Jonathan Groff, from playing King George in the original Broadway production and on the cast recording.
3236	If you’re hardcore, you can just go out there with boots and power through the deep snow.
3237	“If you’re having trouble falling asleep, consider consuming less than 200mgs per day of caffeine, or about one maybe two cups of coffee or one pop.”
3238	If you're new to Android, the term launcher might be confusing.
3239	If you're not a fan of musicals because you think they're all full of manically cheerful performers living out painfully predictable storylines, how's this for a setting?
3240	If you’re phone call or message cannot wait for several minutes, when you live on a tiny island, you need to give up on life.
3241	If you're planning on getting a good night's sleep each day, then you'll want to have some cosy and comfortable surroundings in the bedroom quarters.
3242	If your preferred candidate lost their bid for election, should you take your corflute straight down as a concession of defeat?
3243	If you set an Express Travel Card, you won't need to double tap the button to launch Apple Pay on your Apple Watch when travelling on public transport.
3244	“If you set your reward preference to cash miles, the miles you accumulate can be used as money off your grocery bills.
3245	If you think about it, when does Lungu ever work for the people of Zambia?
3246	If you’ve been doing accurate tracking of your expenses, implementing these tips will be a breeze.
3247	If you wanted to distill the entirety of the James bond franchise down to a single image, this could be it.
3248	If you want to have a shopping spree, want to buy a car, want to travel, etc. you save towards it.
3249	If you want to study in a group, I suggest studying with people from your class who you know, but aren’t particularly close with so that you can focus on the topics at hand.
3250	I get a season finale vibe from all of this stuff.
3251	“I got a call during school and I couldn’t answer it so he left a voicemail.
3252	I got nothing else,” Murray told Global News in an interview.
3253	I got to see a lot of the world that way.
3254	“I guess I’m not feeling that same pride today,” he said.
3255	I guess they can still refuse to give him a passport on the harm to national interest bit since his last trip cost the government quite a bit.
3256	I guess this is also a good time to remind you of the mPulse proposition from MTN, specially designed for the young ones.
3257	“I had a conversation with Didier Deschamps and we both agreed it was the best thing for him, so let’s try and get him fit over the break.
3258	'I had a panic attack right there on the sofa.
3259	I had been meaning to call and talk to her ever since G.A. passed away, but I had to get her phone number from Anita and kept forgetting.
3260	I had no idea this was even a thing.
3261	“I had not been nervous but I was in shock, but that just made me think, ‘OK, all right.
3262	I hadn’t bothered to find out the reason why she couldn’t do her assignment, I just judged and penalized her without a second thought.
3263	I had several stitches.'
3264	“I had to put up with people staring at me and whispering about me because I was the ‘sick girl’.”
3265	I have a feeling that its more the latter than the former.
3266	“I have a higher opinion of the ability of my colleagues to do what’s right than, apparently, the senator from Missouri does,” he said.
3267	I have a lot of faults, too, but when it comes to friendships, I really, really value my friendships with my girlfriends.
3268	I have already voted postally for the Lib Dem candidates in the forthcoming election and I urge you to do so too, if you believe in a European future.
3269	“I have always been really artsy,” said Jenna.
3270	I have been featured in a few international publications, which is amazing but my favourite gigs are always the ones I get to travel Namibia and take pictures that show off the beauty of our land.
3271	I have been here continuously since 1974, which is 45 years ago.
3272	"I have had many interactions with the defendant for 18 months.
3273	I have launched businesses that floundered; I have produced TV series that flopped.
3274	“I have looked at my colleagues who have held this post before, in this arrangement.
3275	“I have never seen a place that had this much brand new equipment, and this is only a fraction of it.
3276	“I have no idea who that is,” Yaniv said.
3277	I have no idea why the Dothraki charged of infantry support into an unseen enemy formation, except that the flames going out made for good and eerie television.
3278	I have often thought back to that session with Annie in the early days of my career.
3279	I have only to hew away the rough walls that imprison the lovely apparition to reveal it to the other eyes as mine see it.”
3280	I have seen a lot of them who looked at the size of the Nigerian economy and wanted to come in, but once they start looking at the economics they pull out.
3281	“I have seen Ananya playing with Suhana and Aryan.
3282	I have seen them collide with a pedestrian and continue on without even looking back.
3283	I have to explain that I am a subcontractor—a private medical provider with an office onsite.
3284	I have very limited time to get the things done that I do, and still raise my kids and make sure I’m tucking them in at night.
3285	I have written on many occasions over the last several months about the sexual abuse of children in the Church and how the Archdiocese is responding in a pastoral way.
3286	IHM also has an annual luncheon to raise funds for the center and for their fellow twinning community, Our Lady of the Mountains in Stanton, KY.
3287	I hope Brett keeps writing, and he’ll find decent dates if he keeps at that too.
3288	I hope the Heavenly toilets of the Founding Fathers empty directly onto his head for all of eternity.
3289	I hope today is a team who is balanced and aggressive.
3290	I just came here tonight to ask people to be a little more forgiving and understanding, especially with entertainers.”
3291	I just couldn't get my brain around why he had turned.
3292	“I just decided not to.”
3293	I just want to help, that’s all.“
3294	I just work around it, I don't get too wild over it."
3295	I keep going to Joey Ryan vs. Ricky Reyes in an LAPD match as an example of Joey Ryan being able to surprise with a strong main event match.
3296	“I kind of ate what I wanted, when I wanted.”
3297	I kind of feed there have been email-worthy things going on!
3298	"I kind of quite like that people voice when they're offended, I think it helps," he said.
3299	“I knew it was bad.
3300	I knew I would get great stuff from them.
3301	I knew the end would have t come at some point, but I was hoping it just wasn’t all true.
3302	“I know all this team has brought me in the past years and I hope that they continue to grow with Plainfield South varsity cheer.
3303	"I know he'll want to hit the ground running and I know he won't want to listen to the narrative of 'if you get off to a slow start it's because you missed however many days of camp.'
3304	I know I should.
3305	"I know, Joe, I know you want there to be aliens," Snowden told Rogan via a video feed.
3306	I know many governors are not saying anything against Fulani herdsmen because they are APC.
3307	I know that I love having a workout buddy when I go to the gym, but I definitely prefer to run alone.
3308	I know that it will be a fight between Nathan and me.”
3309	“I know them quite well and I know a lot of their boys – they are a good side,” said McAlorum.
3310	“I know there are challenges ahead of me.
3311	I know this weekend will be in a much faster car, so I will still have lots of learning to do.
3312	I know what you’re thinking—ugh, another breakup song about getting drunk and forgetting your troubles, but hear me out on this one.
3313	I know you have to follow the tender process but how do you end up with a Hong Kong firm from the other side of the world?
3314	ILCoin (ILC) traded down 4.8% against the dollar and now trades at $0.0408 or 0.00000404 BTC.
3315	“I like my privacy now,” she added.
3316	“I like to send a message of positive energy, no?” says the artist.
3317	I listen to people talking around town and keep hearing someone needs to do something about that guy.
3318	I'll be fine for telling the truth.
3319	“I’ll be in bed by 10:01,” she said.
3320	I’ll call him Tom Thumb.
3321	“I’ll marry you,” she said when he proposed, “but I won’t do any housework.”
3322	I’ll say, ‘It’s making us a more interesting person.’
3323	“I’ll use club jockeys and then eventually I’ll maybe have a stable jockey.
3324	Illustrative: The remains of an attack drone allegedly fired by Yemen's Iran-backed Houthi rebels into Saudi Arabia, December 14, 2017, in Washington.
3325	ILMxLab’s goal with Episode II was to build on the foundation of both the story and the gameplay.
3326	I look after the internal innovation the external investments we make, and help them go through the growth cycles that we've identified for emerging brands.
3327	I look for Hispanic food restaurants like my life depends on it â€” thankfully, there's a lot in New York â€” and I am the happiest when I spot a Puerto Rican flag while walking down the street.
3328	I look for new chords, or rhythms, or anything interesting.
3329	I look forward to Coach Walters leading a championship-style defense here at Mizzou.”
3330	I love everything United States,” laughed the 16-year-old foreign exchange student who is spending a year as an Ionia High School student.
3331	I love the motto we used to have when I was in law enforcement – we are the sheep dogs who will protect the sheep from the wolves.
3332	“I love to compete,” Dominic said.
3333	I love to look good.
3334	"I love Wellsville, and now I get to stay," Taggart said.
3335	I’m a celebrity 2019 line up forced to wear name tags.
3336	"I'm a dad you know, but we're friends.
3337	I made the trip up the QE2 last weekend, with the intent of sampling the crafty wares of the brewers and distillers located in Sylvan Lake and Red Deer.
3338	I’m always interested in achieving more.”
3339	I’m always on a mission to make people laugh.’
3340	I’m always popping in, seeing what kind of junk is around.
3341	“I’m an insecure person and I never had a boyfriend,” she said.
3342	I'm a person of color.
3343	“I match them with one or two fairy godmothers who are volunteers, and they go off and they have hour-and-a-half appointments.
3344	I’m at the absolute heart of English Rugby fans and they’ve been damn graceful about it.
3345	I may be late on this video.
3346	“I maybe said 10 words to Coach Pitino that night, and I didn’t think anything of it.”
3347	“I’m convinced that it was an administrative issue and not criminal.”
3348	“I’m delighted for him.
3349	I mean, if I have to stand up anyhow, why not push a button at the same time?
3350	I mean, if there’s any time to go all-out on fancy dessert, it’s the holidays.
3351	I mean, I'm all for keeping scary mf-ers from having guns, sure - but "Foreigners can be armed too it's a loophole!" smacks of rabble-rousing bs.
3352	“I mean, we’re an all-or-nothing people, right?
3353	“I’m fairly new in my position, so I came here to learn,” said Chief Warrant Officer 3 Jason Ragland, production control officer, for the 2nd Battalion (General Support), 227th Aviation Regiment, at Fort Hood, Texas.
3354	I’m forever thankful.
3355	I'm going to check on him."
3356	“I’m going to get my purse and go.”
3357	I’m grateful to God for preserving my life,” he revealed.
3358	"I'm happy because there's only one me, nobody could be me, but me."
3359	I’m here to enforce his positions.
3360	“I’m hoping that they learned a little bit about the science of social media,” Dick said.
3361	I might have to *gasp* read a farking book.
3362	“I’m in a couple of episodes in the second season.
3363	I’m just doing my job.
3364	“I’m just saying it before anyone else can,” Rhoda tells Mary.
3365	“I’m like, please bring me the cold and the clammy and the clouds,” she says.
3366	“I’m like, ‘these corn flakes are just as good, if not better, than the ones that have a chicken on the box!
3367	I’m looking forward to more growth and greatness for the school in years to come.”
3368	I'm lucky that I didn't lose my sight."
3369	Immunotherapy is one option, but it only works in roughly a fifth of all patients.
3370	I’m never going to step over the boundary of player-coach or player-GM.
3371	I'm not going to lie.
3372	I’m not going to renew, and these are the two best people for the job without question.
3373	I'm not joking.
3374	“I’m not political but basically it doesn’t matter what I think because nobody’s listening,” she said.
3375	“I’m not really doing it for fun,” he said.
3376	I'm often stuck in the elevator with Googlers (our office is on the same floor as one of theirs).
3377	"I'm on cloud 9 right now!
3378	Impala Asset Management LLC now owns 52,370 shares of the construction company’s stock valued at $144,908,000 after acquiring an additional 2,359 shares in the last quarter.
3379	Impressed by the recent Nintendo Direct, a reader explains why he’s such a fan of Nintendo and tries to explain the secret of their success.
3380	“I’m proud to say that Top Brandz Distributors is pleased with the current progress of this year’s Corona Futsal Tournament.
3381	Improving gelding Bugalugs led all-the-way at Taree last start.
3382	I’m reminded of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe’s aphorism: “If you’ve never eaten while crying, you don’t know what life tastes like.”
3383	“I’m so happy I was able to, you know, take advantage of this opportunity I saw this morning, and I definitely wanted her to go on her trip,” Dumba said.
3384	I’m SO proud of this collection and of Oliver, and our friendship, vision, and creativity really comes across in the products we created for you guys.
3385	“I’m sure experienced pros have made mistakes like that going into a challenge like that where they weren’t thinking and got sent off.
3386	I’m sure it’ll look the same for the Packers fans with Ha Ha.”
3387	"I'm sweating my balls off in here"
3388	I’m very excited for tomorrow, looking forward to what he’s going to bring.”
3389	I’m very happy with that, but why should I have to keep secret?
3390	"I'm very thankful for it though."
3391	I’m worried about more of the bigger picture now and I’m working on delegating things more to Connor, to Desmond, to Pops.
3392	In 10 years, you will not regret this decision!
3393	In 1922, Bunnell announced that, on Nov. 30, he would be resigning as publisher of the Duluth News Tribune, and Rockwell made it known that he was still interested in becoming part owner of the paper.
3394	” – In 1939, the British published the White Paper, which hindered the ability to make and settle the Land of Israel.
3395	In 1968, he began his 40-year run at WCCO-TV.
3396	In 1983 it moved to the Astor Building on Broadway, where it remained until 2004.
3397	In 1990 Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait turned him back into an American enemy.
3398	In 1996, he was among the 11 young men who joined the army and did one year basic military training at Kasenyi in Entebbe.
3399	In 1999, new people took over as heads of state in both countries.
3400	In 2001, he lost his job at the health ministry due to a conflict of interest.
3401	In 2005 the organisation declared a formal end to its campaign and had its weaponry decommissioned under international supervision.
3402	In 2011 a Toronto couple sparked a frenzy when they decided not to reveal the sex of their baby, Storm.
3403	In 2012, Pune Warriors cricketers Rahul Sharma and Wayne Parnell were among the 100-odd people who were detained by the Mumbai Police from a party in Juhu.
3404	In 2013, Banks signed with the Atlanta Falcons and played in four preseason games before being released.
3405	In 2014 and 2015 the California think-tank RAND a Russian attack across the Suwalki Gap.
3406	In 2014, even Smriti Irani was humbled against Rahul Gandhi and only in her second attempt she achieved the feat.
3407	In 2016, ICE paid a broadband provider $50,400 “to strengthen C.T.C.E.U.’s open-source social-media exploitation capabilities as well as future growth by adding fiber-optic internet.”
3408	In 2017, Anna Torv returned to the FBI, albeit in a different capacity.
3409	In 2017, Jose also spent over two weeks in Florida restoring power in the aftermath of Hurricane Irma.
3410	In 2017, the city's population was more than twice that at about 54,000.
3411	In 2017, the official opening of the Vancouver Women’s Library, a space with links to Vancouver Rape Relief, was by protesters who handed out pamphlets reading “this library is run by women who hate other women.”
3412	In 2018, growth was 6.4%.
3413	In 2018, he completed his Bachelor of Science degree at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University.
3414	In 2018, Heiden’s photography was named Red Wing Arts Best of Show.
3415	In 2018, she was honored as a distinguished researcher in the social sciences by the University of Illinois at Chicago.
3416	In 2018, the Fe 415 segment had a significant market share, and this trend is expected to continue over the forecast period.
3417	In 2018, the United States abandoned its conciliatory policy on Iran, withdrawing from the JCPOA and hitting Iranian petroleum industries with sanctions.
3418	In 2019 in South Africa, adult women need their husbands' permission to keep their birth names.
3419	In a 2018 letter to Mr Cuomo, the district attorney said his office isn't able to hold offenders accountable because "voluntarily intoxicated" person, under the current law, "isn't considered too drunk to consent."
3420	In accepting the award, RuPaul dedicated his win to co-executive producer “who we just lost recently.”
3421	In addition, he warned that integrity and trustworthiness would not be the only grounds for choosing a new bank and that the eventual winner would be the most cost-effective candidate.
3422	In addition, she’s in the middle of filming an arc on The busy actress is currently bouncing between shooting on location in Atlanta, her home in Los Angeles, and New York where her husband of a month and a half is working at the moment.
3423	“In addition to daily stress induced by his illness among all family members, the mother quit her job to provide homecare, and pets were removed from the home (due to the boy’s delusions).”
3424	In addition to meeting all of those criteria, the Duchess of Sussex will also be required to take and pass a “Life in the U.K. test.”
3425	“In addition to the direct costs of such losses, if the fraud is related to credit card transactions and becomes excessive, it could result in us paying higher fees or losing the right to accept credit card for payment,” the prospectus said.
3426	In addition to the HIV ECHO, the ECHO Center also offers a Hepatitis C ECHO and an LGBTQ+ ECHO.
3427	“In addition to the main meetings, several events will occur during the margins of the Inter-sessional gathering.
3428	In a lawsuit filed Friday, the Orleans Parish School Board claims it has spent $5 million as a result of contractors’ mismanagement at Lafayette Academy’s South Carrollton Avenue building, which was closed last summer due to an asbestos release.
3429	In a lethal opening spell, Bumrah (6/16) rattled the West Indies by picking up the first five wickets, three of which came in successive balls in the ninth over.
3430	In a letter written by Ms Walker's daughter to Pam Northam, which was included as an attachment to the email to politicians, the young girl said she did not take the cotton, but her friend did.
3431	In all cases his work beckons the viewer’s gaze — whether to the intricate beadwork adorning a punching bag or the hole-riddled ceramic skulls on figures he saw in a dream.
3432	In all, eight cities and towns in the region were affected and Staff Sgt. Annie Linteau says other fires include seven sparked between July and August 2015, three set in 2016 and four last year.
3433	In an act of defiance to the Board of Trustees, Holt awarded Susan Wesley, an African American, the Rollins Decoration of Honor on June 2, 1948.
3434	In an apparent attack on Congress, Modi said that the country after independence witnessed ‘dynastic rule under the burqa of democracy’ for a long time.
3435	In a New Mexico impound lot, Shelbie Madsen picked up the last pieces of two lives that never seemed to stop shattering.
3436	In an exclusive interview, the former Romanian prime minister and former European Commissioner, Dacian Cioloș, said his newly-formed political force will be able to tap into a reformist wave that will change his country – and help change the EU.
3437	In an interview with NBC News, Atencio said she didn't include the story to focus on the negative, but instead, "to remind readers that these things still happen."
3438	In an interview yesterday, FAM president Walter Nyamilandu said they will go ahead to advertise the post in both local and international media because they face a race against time.
3439	"In another 20 games, that would be 28 games into the season.
3440	In another study, researchers from Spain analyzed the association between ultra-processed food and death based on Spanish University graduates as part of the Seguimiento Universidad de Navarra study.
3441	In another welcome surprise, the 2019 legislative session approved a second tax relief bill that would meet the needs of renters and homeowners whose increase would be below 50%, but still unaffordable.
3442	In a post on Facebook this evening the Folkestone resident said: "I have decided to retire from track and field.
3443	In a post shared on Twitter, Pakistan Peoples Party Chairman Bilawal Bhutto Zardari said: “Atrocities in Kashmir unabated.
3444	Inappropriate and irrelevant comments will be removed at an adminâ€™s discretion.
3445	In a primary race where Democrats have two dozen candidates to choose from, a personal moment with the candidate can make a difference.
3446	In a Question and Answer session with some fans on Twitter, the Ghanaian actress revealed when she lost her virginity as well as what she looks out for in man.
3447	In a recent poll the Cardinals were ranked No. 14 in the nation, with past success and new head coach John Michael Hayden building anticipation.
3448	In a series of tweets he posted early Wednesday morning (Sept. 11), Wiley reignited his beef with the Canadian rapper by claiming that Drake refuses to clear Wiley's joint effort with OVO Sound signee Popcaan.
3449	In a settlement earlier this year, Skadden Arps acknowledged it had been paid $4.6 million, far more than the $12,000 the Ukrainian government initially said it had paid.
3450	In a statement he personally signed on Wednesday, Atiku posited that Nigerian judiciary just like the other estates has been sabotaged by “a dictatorial cabal.”
3451	In a statement, Shropshire Veggies and Vegans said it also supported farming in the county, and the campaign – which is in its second year - was designed to get people thinking about veganism.
3452	In a statement, the department said it received a call at 2:25 a.m. reporting an open front door at a residence.
3453	In a statement West Coast said the club is “disappointed that one of our players has been provisionally suspended” and that “it will comply fully and openly with ASADA and the AFL”.
3454	In a teary-eyed announcement today from outside Number 10 Downing Street, British Prime Minister Theresa May says she’ll resign June 7th.
3455	In a text alert to its’ passengers Thursday morning, WOW Air apologized and said, “you are allowed to choose from receiving a full refund for your flight or changing your reservation to the next available WOW air flight from your destination.”
3456	In August, Cyrus confirmed she and “Hunger Games” star Hemsworth, 29, after less than a year of marriage.
3457	In August of 2018, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the first generic version of the EpiPen.
3458	In autumn they lay their eggs in soil and on hatching the maggots search for a host.
3459	In a video statement, the foreign minister had said Islamabad decided to invite Manmohan Singh after consultations with all stakeholders.
3460	In a video taken by Achanga, he can be seen looking to the camera and making what he called a “warrior cry” as a way to provide comic relief for the children, who were getting scared.
3461	In a way it's exactly what Spike's lack of concern has earned him.
3462	In a women's field dominated by a long list of big names (Naomi Osaka, Serena Williams and Halep), it's easy to overlook Muguruza, one of just four players to win multiple Slams since 2016 ( has three; Muguruza, Serena Williams and Osaka each has two).
3463	In a written response, the gas extraction company told RTV Noord that it never received the report containing those statements by Jurgens and therefore does not know about it.
3464	“In between the systems that come through we do shut the moisture off quite cleanly and we get good sunshine in between as well,” he explained.
3465	In Billy Batson’s case, by shouting out one word—SHAZAM!
3466	In Book Fairs, expenses were higher than originally planned primarily due to increased incentive-based promotions to address a more competitive environment.
3467	In bouts against opponents like Jessie Vargas and Lucas Matthysse this new style earned his victories in a decisive but safe manner.
3468	In case you are in search of real GFE, I’m your dream package!
3469	Incendiary balloons launched from the Gaza Strip started 19 fires in southern Israel on Wednesday, according to authorities.
3470	In Chapter Eight, he identifies those he calls the “witch-hunters”.
3471	In Chicago, dozens of organizations are using September 11 as a day to give back.
3472	Incidentally, in April, Bank of Maharashtra, the lead banker for the SLBC, issued a circular instructing branches in six districts of Maharashtra, all drought-hit districts, not to issue fresh crop loans at the branch level.
3473	In conclusion, great and developed nations of the world whom we consider as models were able to attain the heights and spot they currently occupy simply because they appreciate and complement their differences.
3474	In contrast, Saudi Arabia cut production faster and deeper than required under the OPEC+ deal, taking its crude output to a four-year low of 9.79 million barrels a day in April.
3475	In contrast to this considered and modest existence, as the festive season gets into full swing, the shocking statistics about how much food we, as a nation, waste have been back in the news.
3476	Incorporate these 5 trends right away.
3477	In crafting its budget, the Alaska House is set to begin debating amendments tomorrow.
3478	Incredibly, the result means United have now won eight straight games on the road since Ole Gunnar Solskjaer took over – something not even Sir Alex Ferguson managed.
3479	In December, the countries will celebrate the 20th anniversary of the Union State Treaty.
3480	Indeed, in the absence of federal standards in the U.S., the onus is on the employer to communicate the value of PTO.
3481	Indeed, Oga Rohr needed a refresher course.
3482	Indeed, Speedway Children’s Charities has been funding nonprofits that support kids throughout an 18-county area encompassing Southwest Virginia and Northeast Tennessee for over 20 years.
3483	Indeed, the conduct of leaders is typically shaped by numerous consensual aspirations or central values.
3484	Indiana Kirk and the Temple of Boom.
3485	Indiana Offering Free Anti-Smoking MedicationThe Indiana Tobacco Quitline is offering tobacco users free medication to help them quit.
3486	Indian companies raised Rs 4.57 lakh crore through private placement of corporate bonds during the first 10 months of the current fiscal to meet business needs.
3487	India rolled out the red carpet for the 33-year-old royal, who received an enthusiastic bear hug from Prime Minister Narendra Modi as he arrived in New Delhi.
3488	India’s matches will mostly start at 3 pm and will be on till at least 11 pm.
3489	India squad for West Indies series to be announced tom: Will Men in Blue test bench strength once again?
3490	In Dinajpur, BRRI 28 and BRRI 29 are selling at Tk 550 per maund whereas last year it was Tk 850, said Shisnabi Mondol, a famer in Surail village under Chirirbandar upazila.
3491	In Division Four, Aldershot won 4-1 at home to Hartlepool, with Alan Woan grabbing a hat-trick, while Brighton suffered a 2-1 defeat by Workington at The Goldstone Ground.
3492	INEC has disappointed Nigerians and the international community.
3493	In Episode 10x02, Beta was caught by Alpha humming a Patsy Cline song.
3494	I never rejected Mr. President’s offer for re-appointment.
3495	Inevitably one of the errant critters will arrive on the scroll wheel, this would be fine, but for one small issue, some idiot decided that the wheel should have a ‘click’ function as well.
3496	In fact, even capital standards were weak at that time with backward-looking regimes instead of forward ones.
3497	In fact, he officially him in January to become the official administrator of the EPA.
3498	In fact, it switches between the two frequently, along with launching its bullets in a diagonal pattern thats sort of similar to the Crossroad.
3499	In fact, not only did Biden not meet with all the families like Lewis said Biden claims, but Lewis said the Obama administration offered trips to Washington on Air Force One only to families who supported the Obama administration's gun agenda.
3500	In fact, quite the opposite is true.
3501	In fact, there were double-digit complaints online from residents who shopped at this Nob Hill Foods and then soon received calls about fraudulent charges.
3502	In fact, viral media coverage gave me the impression that the graduation ceremony was more about glorifying Mr. Smith’s prevailing vanity than celebrating these students’ milestone achievement.
3503	In fact, when I got to Lagos and was staying under Oshodi Bridge, it was hunger that drove me into music.
3504	In February last year, Waterson allegedly pushed his seat back twice in anger at the “noise and fuss” made by Alfie, who was three and a half years old.
3505	In fine weather its beaches are beautiful and tranquil homes to small fishing villages.
3506	Inflation in the eurozone is at an annual 1.3%, short of the ECB’s goal of just under 2% that is considered healthiest for the economy, even after years of low interest rates and massive amounts of monetary stimulus.
3507	Information on the first step to becoming a police officer is below.
3508	In game two, EnFuego took a 5-1 lead after two innings.
3509	In giving Grinnell his due, Taliaferro, a former senior editor at Newsweek, could have put his manuscript on a diet.
3510	In Gujarat, this is the season of the kite festival or Uttarayan.
3511	In her 2018 resignation letter, Haley vowed not to run for president in 2020 and said she would back Trump.
3512	In her caption, the singer thanked Vegas for its warm welcome back to the city, and she said she’d see them tonight.
3513	In her testimony before the House impeachment panel last week, diplomat Marie Yovanovitch suggested that the president’s actions played into the hands of Vladimir Putin, whose government has backed separatists in a five-year-old war in eastern Ukraine.
3514	In Him I live, I move and have my being.
3515	In his address to the reception, arranged to showcase the best of Pakistani culture, the duke recognised the troubled past of Pakistan.
3516	In his first World Series appearance and ninth postseason game, the 29-year-old right-hander gave up his most runs since the White Sox tagged him for six in that May 22 loss.
3517	In his memoir he says, “I am a poet who has been shaped from the start by the threat of things dear to me coming apart.”
3518	In his New York Times opinion piece, he : “If the question is when will markets recover, the first-pass answer is never.”
3519	In his previous outing in this NLDS, Kelly failed to record an out, walking three of the four hitters he faced.
3520	In his second coming he hasn't been in a boring fight.”
3521	In his speech, Mr Kelly went on to say "sinking Pacific islands" were getting bigger.
3522	In India, some politicians are very angry at Twitter.
3523	In India, three of the five innovators among the major States were in the south.
3524	Initially, the girlfriend was waving the fish around in the air to see if the Bald Eagle would come back around.
3525	In its announcement today, Hardsuit announced that the game will miss that window, though will still launch within 2020.
3526	In its greetings, the People’s Progressive Party urged Guyanese to impart the lessons from Diwali in their daily lives, urging Guyanese to be inspired to work in the interests of all and to forge stronger bonds of togetherness.
3527	In January 2017, a London tribunal, organized under the rules of the Nigeria Arbitration and Conciliation Act, ordered Nigeria to pay P&ID $6 billion in damages, plus $2.3 million in uncollected interest.
3528	“In January/February 2020, Datsun Redi GO with BS VI complaint engine will be launched.
3529	In July, Bavelile Hlongwa, the deputy minister of mineral resources and energy, it had "taken a few years to turn around the programme, which was beset by a number of challenges".
3530	In July last year, Pacquiao defeated Argentine boxer and world champion Lucas Matthysse, seizing the WBA welterweight title.
3531	In June, his short film “Faceblind Love,” a romantic comedy, premiered at the New York International Shorts Festival.
3532	In June, the largest of all mayflies emerge from a Hungarian river.
3533	In late New York trading, the euro was up to $1.1033 from $1.1023 in the previous session, and the British pound rose to $1.2854 from $1.2783 in the previous session.
3534	In less than four short months, Reisenweaver had worked his way up the Virginia Tech football hierarchy and landed jobs in the three primary departments of college football.
3535	In lieu of flowers donations may be made to Luther Memorial Lutheran Church, 600 Prices Fork Road, Blacksburg, VA or Good Samaritan Hospice, 2408 Electric Road, Roanoke, VA 24018.
3536	In little more than half an hour there are enough nipples to last a lifetime.
3537	In living color.
3538	“In March 2011, I was invited to visit Kazakhstan as a chef by the government, and then a second time.
3539	In Ma’s world, an explosion of mostly farmers found that they could make things, from auto parts to buttons, from cheap electronics to very sophisticated ones, from toys to towels, that the rest of the world would buy.
3540	In Miami condos, what do buyers get for their money?
3541	In mid-September Palamina announced the sale of two of their Puno Gold Belt properties to Helio Resource Corp. for ten million shares and a 2% NSR.
3542	“In Minneapolis, we need to ensure that our limited funds are put to good uses,” Frey wrote.
3543	In most cases, the spouse of the accused is considered a competent witness for the prosecution.
3544	In Namibia, andBeyond Sossusvlei Desert Lodge, opening in October, plans to put bath products in bulk glass bottles.
3545	IN NEW SHARON, Monday at 12:58 p.m., a fire with a power line down was reported on Starks Road.
3546	Innovative Industrial Properties (NYSE:IIPR) last posted its quarterly earnings data on Wednesday, August 7th.
3547	In November, Prouty noticed a strange bump on his dog’s side, near the ribs.
3548	Innovid and Roku are now making it easier to connect audiences across all of television,” said Jessica Hogue, general manager, measurement and analytics, Innovid.
3549	In Old Norse, the ladder would be called a "Kraki".
3550	"I no longer want to project a curated life," Haynes wrote.
3551	In one case he was given a warning, in the second a fine and in the final case he paid an admittance of guilt fine.
3552	In one interview back in 2017, he suggested that Scarlet Witch's abilities in the MCU may actually be mystical, analogous to Doctor Strange's but raw and untrained.
3553	In one particularly striking moment, Judge Engelmayer referenced Bruce Springsteen in discussing 6ix9ine’s artistic license and why it did not afford him added legal protections.
3554	In order for an event to be considered for 21 Best, we need information at least three weeks in advance.
3555	In order to bring down price of its offerings, Hitachi re-designed products and optimised costs.
3556	In order to cut down on emissions, the plan requires many current car users to other modes of transportation at least a few times a week, including walking, biking, and public transit.
3557	In order to survive, he pretends to ignore that a copy of his notes are safe in Vienna and drags his wife towards death in order to protect them with him in the camp; he takes for himself the shoes of a dying fellow prisoner.
3558	In other Deckers Outdoor news, CEO David Powers sold 2,500 shares of the company’s stock in a transaction on Friday, October 11th.
3559	In other news, Director Will W. Graylin sold 7,500 shares of the firm’s stock in a transaction dated Monday, September 30th.
3560	In other ORBCOMM news, EVP John J. Stolte, Jr. sold 4,207 shares of the stock in a transaction on Thursday, March 7th.
3561	In our neighbourhood we have houses sitting vacant for years before the city will even acknowledge them, let alone demolish.
3562	In particular, we went into the apartment of a middle-aged woman who claimed to have lived in the United States for about 27 years and returned to her hometown recently.
3563	“In pictures I suppose I see the resemblance, but when I’m standing next to her or looking at her directly I don’t see it,” Laura said.
3564	In Raleigh, Sebastian Aho scored two goals off the skates of Buffalo defensemen, and Carolina held on to spoil Jeff Skinner’s return to Raleigh.
3565	In recent months the US has strengthened its forces in the Gulf - saying there was a danger of Iranian attacks.
3566	In recent weeks, the president has issued about four women of colour who are all Democrat Congresswomen.
3567	In related news, insider R Steven Hamner sold 70,000 shares of the stock in a transaction that occurred on Wednesday, August 7th.
3568	In response, Israel launched a wave of air strikes and ramped up its forces at the border.
3569	In response, the protecting counsel Mr Adeniyi said the prosecution is not opposed to such prayer.
3570	In response to sustained US pressure, both women were released, but too late for them to compete.
3571	In Saturday’s release, he blamed the impasse on the government.
3572	"In selecting a global partner, we sought an organization that put the value of alternative data at its core.
3573	In September 2015, Yanes' mother Nereyda and his brother Raidel had traveled to Cuba to persuade him to come home.
3574	In September 2018, the New York Attorney General’s office on the “shadowy inner workings of 10 popular cryptocurrency exchanges,” the MIT Technology Review wrote.
3575	In short, things haven’t changed much, and our two-tiered justice system seems as rotten as ever.
3576	Inside an electric fence, a litter of pup-size piglets scampered around a fat black sow, miniature hooves flinging muck over their darkly mottled coats.
3577	Inside is high-contrast red stitching, Shelby GT350R badging and the D-shaped steering wheel fitted with a red center mark at the top.
3578	Insiders own 4.86% of the company’s stock.
3579	Insiders sold 173,773 shares of company stock valued at $33,063,147 in the last 90 days.
3580	Inside the courtroom, a packed gallery awaited what was expected to be the finale of a true crime saga that has gripped Melbourne and the nation.
3581	In some cases, party bosses wouldn’t allow any grassroots evaluation of their incumbent Members of Parliament — no one else was allowed to seek the nomination.
3582	In some cases, the archives have even kept people out of jail.
3583	In some of the smaller courts there is no waiting area at all, and litigants, along with their lawyers, have to wait in cramped hall-ways, sit on stairs, stand outside the court or wait in nearby hotels.
3584	“In some places, mussels are used, as well as oysters, to cleanse the sea of pesticides, for example,” Meistertzheim noted.
3585	In South Africa’s Limpopo province, Sarina Malatji, now a 39-year-old mother of three, grew up in an area where access to education was limited.
3586	In South Carolina - where black voters made up about half of the electorate - Kerry did better among black voters, nearly winning their vote in his second place finish in that state.
3587	Inspector Lee Brachmann, the officer in command of the Lloydminster RCMP Detachment, holds that efforts to reduce crime will continue.
3588	In spite of criticism that the move against Onnoghen did not follow laid-down rules the trial proceeded with unusual speed.
3589	Instead, he takes his time, assesses conditions and plays the ball on its merits.
3590	Instead, he talked about protecting the forces still in the country, saying he would give them air cover and “make it clear they’re not going anywhere.”
3591	Instead, it should have come out with a clear, radical programme of expropriating Shell without compensation (as the company has been subsidised and de facto pays no tax), and lowering the energy prices for working people and small companies.
3592	Instead of a “zillion dollar” chandelier, a friend made a pendant light in the hallway from cardboard rolls wrapped in brown paper, for retro effect.
3593	Instead of erring on the side of caution and treating video subjects of an unknown age as minors, the platform’s guidelines advised the moderators to “treat subjects as though they were over 18 if their age was unclear,” according to The Guardian.
3594	Instead of, say, trying to be a fitness star or fashion maven, Martin went the cosplay route: Specifically, he decided to cosplay as, well, his 19-year-old daughter.
3595	“Instead, other FDI enablers such as political stability and security, legal and regulatory environment and talent and skill availability are valued more by investors.
3596	Instead the reality is that taking away this choice will again erode women’s rights.
3597	Instead there will be a vote on Wednesday that could be used to express the parliament's wish for a referendum or a delay.
3598	Instead, the runaway meal could be live sashimi from a restaurant that practices "ikizukuri," a traditional Japanese method of preparing seafood for consumption.
3599	Instead, the utility’s fire management plan include pruning vegetation around its equipment.
3600	Institutional investors and hedge funds own 25.44% of the company’s stock.
3601	Institutional investors own 80.58% of the company’s stock.
3602	Intel claims that it is in the process of building a 10nm chip stockpile for testers, which suggests that these chips may begin shipping as soon as the third quarter.
3603	Intention has to do with a purpose, upon which one’s mind is concentrated and fixed.
3604	Interactions with the survey primarily came from women, who made up about 72pc of respondents.
3605	Interestingly, majority of Indians polled are preoccupied about their physical wellbeing (75 per cent), over mental wellbeing (62 per cent).
3606	Interesting Pat fans against it.
3607	Interest is the cause, inflation is the result.”
3608	Inter Miami are likely to aim to bring in a host of experience on free transfers – but revealed they would be focusing on youth.
3609	Inter Milan defender Kwadwo Asamoah has been named as the new Black Stars assistant captain.
3610	In terms of political parties and other campaigners, the Electoral Commission is the UK’s political finance regulator.
3611	In terms of the draw, I really only look at the first couple of rounds.
3612	International data is still weaker; Japan and the EU are sill in a soft patch.
3613	International Stars decided to enter a team comprised of kids from their winter baseball clinics into the 2013 Detroit Police Athletic League (PAL)/RBI summer league.
3614	“In that period, you’ve had desertification, Lake Chad has lost its water resources, the resources have shrunk and the population has increased.
3615	In that same year, Haaretz published an investigation into the relationship between Netanyahu and the controlling shareholder of Bezeq, Shaul Elovitch.
3616	In that span he had just one 20-point game.
3617	In the 18/19 financial year, there were 10,601 reports to the Victorian Inspectorate regarding horses – a 21 percent increase from the previous year.
3618	In the 2016 election, whatever else may be said of them, Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump kept the ball between the 30-yard lines, which would not have been the case if their chief rivals, Bernie Sanders and Ted Cruz, had been the nominees.
3619	“In the 50s all private businesses were nationalized and business owners had to hand in their property to the Chinese Communist Party.
3620	"In the 90s there was a lot of solidarity, but today Cuba is different, there's a lot of laziness, a lack of solidarity.
3621	“In the adjudication of justice, the most important principle to me is that we get it right,” he said.
3622	In the air, as an airplane climbs, air pressure decreases, as does the amount of oxygen available to a pilot.
3623	In the area of health care, like what we have done and their plans.
3624	In theatres October 11.
3625	In the autumn of that year, Andrew flew to New York and attended a Halloween ‘hookers and bondage’ party in Manhattan, where Ghislaine dressed as a prostitute.
3626	In the background is a hill with a view of the sky.
3627	In the caption, Elsie revealed that shortly after she posed for these naps, she was sea-sick.
3628	In the caption, Rachel noted that this is the final Halloween photo she will be posting on Instagram.
3629	In the case of the recent shooting, Oklahoma has long been an 'open' or 'concealed' carry state, allowing most adults to carry guns openly without a permit as long as they have a 'legitimate purpose and aren't violating other laws'.
3630	In the case of Venezuela, the Chávez government nationalized the oil industry, not an insignificant thing given that Venezuela sits upon the world’s largest reserves of crude oil.
3631	In the center of the ring, Smith was laying on top of Fenix, and it was a bit awkward.
3632	In the chorus, he insists he will live his life for the both of them.
3633	In the clip, captured last month, Zero holds the long, wooden stick in his mouth as he stands by the door.
3634	“In the coming year, we will develop a work-integrated learning strategy with this goal in mind.”
3635	In the days since the deadly violence, there has been a strong army presence on the streets of Wamena, and shops, schools and gas stations have been closed.
3636	In the end it’s beautiful to see what’s taking place.”
3637	In the event that you have the ability to sort the correspondence.
3638	In the event that you have to write a formal correspondence you must handle a man which you have never met, the letter has to be framed.
3639	In the final quarter, the Wizards’ lead stayed between two and five until Beal’s two free throws made it a six-point game with 5:20 to play.
3640	In the following months, he was subject to a series of sexual assaults by a group of men.
3641	In the following year, Ngo began to capitalize on his new national platform.
3642	In the fourth quarter of New England’s 10-3 loss to the Jets, linebacker Mo Lewis levels Patriots quarterback Drew Bledsoe near the sideline, knocking him out of the game with a sheared blood vessel in his chest.
3643	In the four years of President Buhari’s Administration, Nigeria has regressed by almost every domestic and international metric.
3644	In the future, this will help them be more efficient at workplace.
3645	In their June quarter, Aurora Cannabis () earned 61% gross margins on wholesale cannabis despite selling it at only $3.61/gram.
3646	In their peak, the five horses had spent their days patrolling the capital’s streets, helping officers control unruly mobs, and also winning medals at the All India Police Meets.
3647	In the last 10 years, the company's share count dropped significantly while its total debt and debt-to-equity ratios skyrocketed.
3648	“In the last 18 to 20 months, the work put in by Arun has been phenomenal.
3649	In the last 90 days, insiders have sold 999,158 shares of company stock worth $163,638,983.
3650	In the last 90 days, insiders sold 444,222 shares of company stock worth $21,764,784.
3651	In the last seven days, Aditus has traded 0.4% lower against the U.S. dollar.
3652	In the last seven days, Byteball Bytes has traded down 5.5% against the US dollar.
3653	In the last two years, promoters with spare cash have opted to pick up assets via the inorganic and IBC routes, especially steel, cement and power plants.
3654	In the last week, BipCoin has traded flat against the dollar.
3655	In the last week, ECC has traded down 6.2% against the dollar.
3656	In the latter case, platforms are used to host portable systems that can be moved to rival systems, or self-hosted, on short notice.
3657	In the letter, Tony laid out his case for reconsideration.
3658	“In the light of the above, the South East Governors Forum will meet on Saturday, August 31, 2019, to among other issues, deliberate on the challenges and come up with a regional plan to be adopted.
3659	In the long run it could sap productivity.
3660	In the Mass he invites us to offer this type of worship together with him to God.
3661	In the Mayor’s Report, Mayor Lowry announced that the Almonte Heritage Redevelopment Group had been given an award by the National Trust for Canada, for their rehabilitation of five heritage buildings in Almonte.
3662	In the meantime, let's all give a bit of thanks not to be in Los Angeles.
3663	In the meantime, the candidates are able to request exam certificates online, the Examination Department said further.
3664	In the meantime the state planning committee insists on fully controlling usage of the funds.
3665	In the modern world’s defense, aside from those who really radically embrace relativism, most people carry with them a mixed view.
3666	In the New York study, car commuters in particular reported more stress and negative emotions.
3667	In the novel, the slaughterhouses of Chicago serve as a metaphor for the ruthless greed of America in the age of the robber barons, of a society ruled by the law of the jungle.
3668	“In the past, many universities were well-meaning with their idea of a recruiter who got a student interested, then handed off to an admissions office, then handed off to the faculty, then sent out into the world with a diploma,” Terry said.
3669	In the policing agency's 'crime has no gender' campaign, Europol has revealed the details and faces of fugitives wanted by 21 European countries.
3670	“In the process, the community-based entities will obtain the relevant skills and knowledge needed to close the digital gaps and develop their businesses.
3671	In the report, O'Connor said Biden is a "healthy vigorous 77-year-old male who is fit to execute the duties of the presidency."
3672	In the Reverse Corporate Billing situation we are unable to attain competitiveness nor transparency.
3673	In the same time, at least four petrol operated vehicles can be examined.
3674	In the second period, it was Prow carrying the puck all the way below the Devils’ goal line before finding a wide-open Lafferty at the bottom of the left circle for a one-timer and a 2-0 lead.
3675	In the seven cases in which health care professionals have been credibly accused, Fox said, no doctor has been convicted of fertility fraud as such.
3676	In the social media post, Eva encouraged others to consider adoption if they were looking to add a pet to their family.
3677	In the studio, Schofield jokingly admitted Johnson's words were "brutal" and addressing Blunt's comment, Willoughby added: "Mary Poppins serving her the papers on a red carpet!"
3678	In the third part, she on last Saturday (September 14) announced a stressed asset fund to fund unfinished real estate projects and measures to boost exports.
3679	In the United States, the competition will include Instacart, a start-up backed by blue-chip Silicon Valley venture firms, as well as Amazon, which gained an enormous footprint in groceries with its acquisition of Whole Foods in 2017.
3680	In the valley, nearly all of about 50 Kashmiris interviewed said they expected India’s actions to increase the sense of alienation and in turn feed the rebellion.
3681	In the video, the fake Mr Johnson tells the camera: "Hi folks, I am here with a very special message.
3682	In the wake of a report on Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s ethics violation in the SNC-Lavalin case, the At Issue panel reconvenes to discuss how much the latest chapter in this controversy will hurt the Liberals in the upcoming federal election.
3683	"In the Wipro case, it appears phishing was used to gain network access using the compromised credentials of the employee that clicked a malicious link," he said.
3684	In the words of the bureau’s Police Colonel Thatchapong Sarawanangkul, who recently addressed a crowded forum of concerned foreigners organized by the Foreign Correspondents Club of Thailand (FCCT), “It’s easier than telling your wife you’re (back) home.”
3685	In the years since Disney purchased Lucasfilm, the Disney-owned Marvel has debuted a number of different Star Wars titles, some of which are standalone adventures while others were tie-ins to movie releases.
3686	In this context, the issue of corruption as it relates to the institution of the judiciary is even more crucial.
3687	“In this country, First Ladies enjoy a lot of goodwill.
3688	In this enchanting memoir, Muldoon uncovers the secrets for getting back on your feet and embracing the kind of woman you’ve always wanted to be.
3689	In this July 24, 2019, file photo, Ward 3 Coun.
3690	In this regard, the agriculture department has written to the state’s Rural Development and Panchayats Department to curb the illegal practice which is harmful to the environment.
3691	In this titular role, Huppert plays a famous actress who devises a group getaway with her friends and family in order to facilitate her own mysterious and manipulative underlying intentions.
3692	In this two horse race, while Dodds and Finucane are both lawyers who have held Belfast's mayoral role, the contrast between them couldn't be starker.
3693	In this two-tone dress with patterned belt, Emma’s sticking to what suits her best in a matte maroon skirt that (kind of) matches her hair.
3694	In this way, the people who want to protect him unwittingly join the effort to silence him.
3695	In this world you will have trouble.
3696	In those meetings, Studrawa told his players that NFL teams only have a limited amount of spots for offensive lineman.
3697	In three independent samples, participants in both high- and low-activation, positive-emotion conditions (joy, contentment) exhibited faster cardiovascular recovery from negative emotional arousal, compared to those in the neutral or sad film conditions.
3698	In total, European carriers will have to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 6 million metric tons within 11 years to achieve their carbon targets, BloombergNEF analyst Kyle Harrison said in a research note.
3699	Intraventus felt targeted because many body painters feature just as (if not more) revealing displays when on camera and yet none have received bans.
3700	In turn, all this helps to build better prospects and opportunities for improved livelihoods,” said the WTO chief.
3701	Investec Asset Management LTD now owns 2,851,049 shares of the financial services provider’s stock worth $227,371,000 after buying an additional 331,392 shares during the period.
3702	Investigators are reportedly trying to determine whether the wealthy sex offender was assaulted or attempted to harm himself.
3703	Investigators found Kling was in possession of most of the stolen property from the burglary.
3704	Investing $1.5 billion in election security and infrastructure.
3705	Investors can also focus on this quickly growing segment through targeted ETF strategies.
3706	Investors can then use their newly-acquired Bitcoin or Ethereum to buy CDX Network using one of the exchanges listed above.
3707	Investors can then use their newly-acquired Bitcoin or Ethereum to purchase HotNow using one of the exchanges listed above.
3708	Investors can then use their newly-acquired Bitcoin or Ethereum to purchase SnipCoin using one of the aforementioned exchanges.
3709	Investors can then use their newly-acquired Ethereum or Bitcoin to purchase Insolar using one of the aforementioned exchanges.
3710	Investors can then use their newly-acquired Ethereum or Bitcoin to purchase PKG Token using one of the exchanges listed above.
3711	Investors of record on Friday, August 30th will be paid a dividend of $0.063 per share.
3712	Investors seeking to acquire Celer Network should first purchase Ethereum or Bitcoin using an exchange that deals in U.S. dollars such as Changelly, or Gemini.
3713	Investors seeking to acquire HashCoin should first purchase Bitcoin or Ethereum using an exchange that deals in U.S. dollars such as Changelly, GDAX or Gemini.
3714	Investors seeking to acquire Soverain should first purchase Bitcoin or Ethereum using an exchange that deals in U.S. dollars such as Gemini, or GDAX.
3715	Investors seeking to acquire Wrapped Bitcoin should first buy Ethereum or Bitcoin using an exchange that deals in U.S. dollars such as Changelly, or GDAX.
3716	Investors shed N18.05 billion ($50 million) on the Nigerian Stock Exchange ahead of 2019 presidential elections.
3717	In Vladimir's Russia, Chicken wins YOU!
3718	Invoicing enables the clients to check by simply sign in their accounts.
3719	In warm weather, many Afghans bring charpoy beds outside.
3720	In "Welcome to the Dollhouse," Cece steps up her game by kidnapping Aria, Hanna, Spencer, and Emily after setting them up to be arrested.
3721	In what is being read by some as a snub to ASEAN, the US is being represented by national security adviser Robert O’Brien and commerce chief Wilbur Ross.
3722	In Wilson’s estimation, self-checkout could bring on a new wave of complaints since there’s no interaction between employees and customers.
3723	I offer the bribe and then I am arrested for the crime of offering a bribe.
3724	IOM Regional Director for West and Central Africa, Richard Danziger, said “reintegration must be a shared responsibility and implemented in full partnership between governments and all layers of the society.
3725	I once worked with a very dictatorial director and I would never want to be like that!
3726	I only wished I had met my ‘wonder solution’ earlier.
3727	IOST (IOST) traded down 2.4% against the dollar and now trades at $0.0045 or 0.00000049 BTC.
3728	I pray you have a speedy recovery.
3729	I probably would've done a whole lot less heroin if Mom could've ever put the bottle down or at least pretended to have fun any time she was sober.
3730	I promise to deliver to my very best as soon as I get to office," said the MCA-elect.
3731	I put my 28 pounds toddler forward facing at position 2. He sleeps without his head hanging down like when he sits in other car seats.
3732	Iran says that it will not hold any talks with the current US administration until it returns to the JCPOA and lifts all illegal sanctions.
3733	Iran’s Davoudi wins gold at Asian Weightlifting C’ships - Mehr News Agency https://en.
3734	“I realized he is so two-faced.
3735	“I really don’t think I ever would have left B.U. for any other situation, or people, or organization than this,” he added.
3736	“I really think a large part of the results that we saw yesterday were Virginians saying they’ve had enough,” Mr. Northam said about gun violence and the lack of action on gun control in the state capitol.
3737	I recently read that 75 per cent of job success can be attributed to optimism, social skills and handling of stress.
3738	IRENA FISCHER-HWANG: Video relay interpreting connects deaf individuals with an interpreter on video — through a computer, mobile device or videophone — who relays information between parties on a call.
3739	Ironically they feel they can do a better job than the incumbent, yet they are part of the system and using state resources to campaign without conscious.”
3740	Ironically, while the question itself is irrelevant to the next Mayor, this is yet another example of Mike Nelson dodging a loaded and controversial question by giving a non-answer.
3741	I said, "how old is she?"
3742	I said, "If I just saw you as this well-known, disciplined, tough gallerist, I don't think we'd be friends."
3743	I said in the tweet what I have said here in this House, that we remain available to assist the students of Fees Must Fall with an application for a presidential pardon,” Lamola said.
3744	” I said I would do it with him.
3745	I said, 'No, I can't, religious purposes,'" explains Fatima, who lives in Santa Clara.
3746	I said that choosing a winner was easy.
3747	“I said that I’m focused on a championship with the Lakers, and, of course, everyone knows I’ll be a free agent next year, and I said we’ll see where it goes.’
3748	“I said to the governor, ‘I think this is a teachable moment.'
3749	I said we must prioritize spending in the classroom, we’ve done that.”
3750	Is Apple Card Worth It?
3751	I say, pull it out and put on the counter with pride!
3752	Is Brad Sheppard the AFL's most underrated player?
3753	Is Bringing Back the Draft the Answer?
3754	I selfishly decided to use Oz, Neverland, Wonderland, Camelot, and the Sherwood Forest because those were my favorite books growing up and I also think they’re some of the most recognizable worlds in fiction.
3755	“I sell used cars and 30 cars that were my bread and hard-earned investment were burnt to ashes and I don’t know why,” said Orji.
3756	IS fighters slaughtered thousands of Yazidi men and boys, then abducted women and girls to be abused as “sex slaves”.
3757	Is he a southern comic, a la Jeff Foxworthy, or at least a pretend-southern comic like Larry the Cable Guy?
3758	Is he part of the Sheboygan surfing club?
3759	'Is he sure it wasn't a stroke,' joked Gem.
3760	Is it a commentary or allegory about body augmentation in anticipation of a future where everyone is implanted with machines?
3761	Is it infected?'
3762	Is it naughty of National Grid and SSE to play games with their holding company structures in response to Labour’s plan to renationalise parts of their business?
3763	Is it time for a sleep divorce?
3764	ISLAMABAD – A powerful bomb-and-gun attack on the largest American military base in Afghanistan early Wednesday killed at least one person and wounded more than 80 others, mostly civilians.
3765	ISLAMABAD: Deepika Padukone is the chairperson of the MAMI trust and she opened the film festival with a Movie Mela today.
3766	Islands (2.9 percent) and Thailand (3.5 percent).
3767	Is Louisville fun, or should I stay home?
3768	Isolated to scattered showers and storms fire up during the afternoon, but remain hit-or-miss in coverage.
3769	I sold my CD player to a senior citizen three years ago,” said one pal recently.
3770	“I spent years of my life and a lot of energy and money traveling for concerts.
3771	“Israeli food talks about a region, but talking about Jewish food is the widest culinary map,” the chef said.
3772	Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin would normally have responded to such a provocation by flattening portions of Iraq with the Israeli Air Force.
3773	Israel Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu indicted on corruption chargesIsraelâ€™s longest-serving premier could face up to 10 years in prison if convicted of bribery and a maximum three-year term for fraud and breach of trust.
3774	Israel responded with strikes across the strip, which killed five people in total, including Abu al-Ata.
3775	Israel’s Ambassador to Washington Ron Dermer said that Israel as a sovereign nation has the power to fight back against antisemitism.
3776	Israel’s dad had been absent from the family for years and as a single parent, Israel’s mom struggled to provide for her family.
3777	ISRO had on August 21 performed second lunar bound orbit manoeuvre for Chandrayaan-2 and said all spacecraft parameters are normal.
3778	ISSF secretary general Alexander Ratner said Pakistan have suggested to shift the quota competition for the said event to the World Cup in Beijing, which is scheduled to take place in April.
3779	Is Stefani really forcing Shelton to lose weight?
3780	I started out mostly looking for chess sets but soon found a plethora of other interesting items.
3781	I stay in the merging lane until the very end, and I'm always super confused about why people honk at me and think I'm the worst driver on the planet!
3782	Is that song followed by "My Wife's UTI?"
3783	Is the government engaged in covert actions to disrupt communities it deems dangerous?
3784	Is there anything on my face?
3785	Is this the Android tablet to buy if you have no budget limit?
3786	Is TikTok a Threat to the United States?
3787	I still come to training every day and know that I need to work harder.
3788	I struggled here last year so I'm hoping to rectify that."
3789	I subscribe when I find a deal.
3790	“I talked about people who committed serious crimes, dangerous criminals.
3791	It all comes to Goodell.
3792	"It all happened then, and I felt it happen and I felt the paintings happen," Quilty says.
3793	“It also concretely exemplifies our new organization mission: ‘Empowering humanity to build a better world through Montessori.’
3794	It also earned bronze medals for Rhuberry Jubilee, Baco Noir and Harvest Sunset Red.
3795	It also fails to distinguish between those who are being supported by sponsors who arranged their immigration and those who acquired permanent residence status without having sponsors to whom they could turn in case of need.
3796	It also found that Myanmar should be held responsible in international legal forums for alleged genocide against the Rohingya.
3797	It also includes a beer garden for those 21 and over and a few food trucks.
3798	It also recognises the faces of different drivers and automatically sets preferences such as seat position, door-mirror angles and air-conditioning settings.
3799	It also said it would not produce more memory than it sells.
3800	It always amazes me that so little attention is given to the real needs of students.
3801	It appeared no one was home in the four affected apartments on the top floor, while the other residents managed to self-evacuate.
3802	It appears Klopp will be happy to walk away from a potential major trophy if he feels too much is demanded of his squad.
3803	It bears mentioning that no legitimate publications or websites have run anything about this supposed public meal, the date of which the tabloid also glaringly omitted.
3804	It became a world model for saving lives.
3805	It begins with Memoirs, which blows the doors off by revealing Zeref and Natsu are actually brothers, and Natsu died 400 years prior in a dragon attack.
3806	It behooves Major League Baseball to have players hitting as many home runs as possible.
3807	It cannot be revived after maturity nor can it be closed before maturity.
3808	It can result in permanent scarring in patients’ lungs with symptoms such as breathing difficulties and chronic coughing.
3809	It certainly looked like she had a great birthday celebration, especially during the party on the boat.
3810	It comes as Philadelphia city officials strongly consider a sweeping ban on single-use plastic bags and a 15-cent fee on reusable bags that many stores provide.
3811	"It could be hard work, as we machined all of the wood and the machines were at least 100 years old.
3812	It could be something like that… I didn’t mean just Wrestle – but WWE, something big… If I promoted my own show and I wrestled on it.”
3813	It could well take months before we know who the next prime minister is.
3814	It covers the same three countries as the North American Free Trade Agreement, which the Trump administration is seeking to replace.
3815	It created a spectacle and Bangladesh didn’t have the wherewithal to handle it.
3816	It criticised the national park authority for disregarding complaints and underplaying the damage being inflicted on the area.
3817	It depends on collaboration with state and local partners."
3818	It describes Prager University, Jordan Peterson and Ben Shapiro as “Nazis” and addresses the question how their influence can be reduced.
3819	It did not disclose the administrative actions Dunford took against Troxell before reinstating him.
3820	It did not happen and it unlikely to in the near future.
3821	It did not say how many people had been taken by bus to Chiapas so far.
3822	“It does not break the focus — quite the opposite.
3823	It does not make sense to embark on retrogressive protests when their people are suffering," he said.
3824	It does not matter whether they are citizens or foreigners.
3825	It doesn’t track internet searches, and it has nothing to do with school Wi-Fi networks.
3826	It earned him his second Pulitzer, the 1983 prize for biography.
3827	It ended in a drubbing, but Celtic are going to inflict this kind of punishment on many teams this season.
3828	It ends with the words "Out of Towner Steve Bullock" and "Out of Touch with Montana" plastered on the screen.
3829	“It feels like probably the most expensive photo op in the university’s history,” said UC Berkeley spokesman Dan Mogulof.
3830	It gives a great performance in terms of gaming, the camera as it is equipped with a 90Hz display along with a powerful processor.
3831	It had the look of an ornate hand mirror and could be used for her specialty water-based attack, Submarine Reflection, a more damaging assault than her already impressive Deep Submerge.
3832	“I thank the PTAD and government for ensuring that my mother can benefit from the pension after retiring from service many years ago,” he said.
3833	I thank you, Director.
3834	It happened just before 9 p.m. on East 12th Avenue near McClure Street.
3835	It happened Sunday evening on June 2nd in Miami Gardens along Northwest 37th Avenue and 2017 Street.
3836	It has a varied membership in terms of the committee.
3837	"It has been a massive stress emotionally on the family but six years later let's enjoy today."
3838	It has been a while since we last heard anything about sleazy rightwing jerkbag Jacob Wohl, who hasn't beshitted himself very publicly since April, when he tried to promote a fake sexual assault claim against Pete Buttiegieg.
3839	It has been called “the crime of the 21century.”
3840	It has eye-catching light fixtures and vibrant upholstery; imagine the “flavor of the streets of Mexico” coming to life on the walls, suggests today’s announcement.
3841	It has no doubt changed society for the better in some ways—especially in Hollywood, by exposing abusers and empowering women.
3842	It has one of the strongest Orthodox churches on the continent.
3843	It has over 150 stickers, fun scenes featuring the players, fans, and goals.
3844	It has provided support to channels on the platform in terms of making things "as easy as possible."
3845	It has that decadent curved entrance which was the signature of many of its contemporaries - a legacy of its birth at the hands of Andrew Mather in 1931.
3846	“It helps us identify students who have excelled in their context in a more clear and convincing way than we ever could have in the past,” said Quinlan, dean of undergraduate admissions and financial aid.
3847	"I think about it all the time," said Raimi.
3848	"i think allowing moms to be with their children for that amount of time is so beneficial to them and beneficial to the moms to get that time."
3849	I think building relationships is the most important thing we can do for our kids; putting compassionate people in front of them to build those relationships is key.”
3850	I think Gilead is getting stronger.
3851	“I think good teams can win a variety of ways,” Cousins said.
3852	I think i can't conclusively rule it out.
3853	“I think if they would have said, ‘Yeah, we’re going to get you into counseling,’ I don’t think he’d be dead,” Kim Predmore said.
3854	“I think if we take care of rebounding like Huggins’ teams do, value the ball on offense and take good shots, I think we have a chance.”
3855	I think it is certainly part of the story.
3856	“I think it is probably a benefit to the re-election of President Trump,” Corporon said, referring to the impeachment effort.
3857	"I think it is telling that you have senior Republicans and a former military commander, amongst many others, raising concerns about this decision," she said.
3858	I think it’s a good thing to have and it makes winning that much more fun.”
3859	I think it’s a matter of having a conscious effort, being very intentional.
3860	I think it’s important for those of us that care to try and put statements of beauty and truth and joy out into the world and make accurate statements, not nihilistic statements.
3861	“I think it would be a lot better if we had more of what I call ‘David’s’ in the tournament.
3862	I think one of the biggest mistakes a retailer can make is pricing inventory like a discount retailer to win back business.
3863	“I think people have high expectations for the emperor, who is fluent in foreign languages and internationalized,” said historian and monarchy expert Eiichi Miyashiro, who is also a journalist.
3864	I think some really played their tail off and competed.
3865	I think that kind of exacerbated the problem.
3866	“I think that’s the accurate description of that.”
3867	I think that the probability that the Palestinian Authority will end the relations on the cooperation with Israel according to the agreement, is still a low probability.
3868	“I think the community really needed to hear this case be alive and to hear what information we had and to hear there was actually action being taken and to move it forward again,” added John Vandoren, a neighbor of the Long family, to CBS.
3869	"I think the complexity of the problems that face humanity are at a level that is beyond any one nation, any one group of people to solve," he says.
3870	I think the experience of black people in this country — as I was saying, in terms of Du Bois — runs right down the middle of the country.
3871	“I think the federal government, they talk about that, but I think they could really do a lot more looking at customer relationships and whether they’re strategically aligned with the businesses, the federal departments and agencies,” he said.
3872	I think the word ‘leader’ implies you’re going towards something.
3873	I think things are changing, and it’s a question of generations.
3874	I think this film captures how much fun we had making it, and how much joy and laughter we want to spread this holiday season.”
3875	“I think we are all excited for next week.
3876	“I think we should be in and around the places behind there,” he said.
3877	“I think we’ve managed to really stay a family.
3878	I think you got four heavyweights in there.
3879	"It hits close to home because it's happening to us."
3880	I thought, ‘How could he do this to me?’
3881	I thought it was a container.
3882	I thought many dedicated radio listeners would like to know how their favourite presenters started the journey,” he added.
3883	“I thought overall the defense did a good job,” UCLA coach Chip Kelly said.
3884	“I thought we could win last start but we just ran into a good one,” Thompson said.
3885	It ignores that care options may be more limited in remote or rural areas.
3886	It is a collective eye-roll that implies “you obviously don’t get, so I guess I’ll take care of it myself.”
3887	It is a desperate act”.
3888	“It is a different relationship with the local press because we see you all the time and talk to you quite often.
3889	It is a good move for a lot of reasons, including encouraging people to use Facebook stories even more.
3890	“It is a growing problem,” said Simkin about the use of the drug.
3891	It is a hard story to swallow because it destroys the fairy tale that has been constructed about American “democracy” and the decency of our leaders.
3892	It is also as if you have to make a covenant between you and the people,” the JLP leader added.
3893	"It is also our understanding that the group had attended an outside event before returning to the apartment."
3894	It is also perfect revenge for coach Paul Aigbogun’s men who were defeated in the semi-final stage of the African Youth Championships by the same Malian team earlier in the year.
3895	It is also selling castings to the US Navy.
3896	It is also within the Rwenzori range, and here you will find leopards, antelopes, chimpanzees, and elephants among other smaller animal species.
3897	It is a mental health journey throughout and includes various quotes from Artest’s psychiatrist regarding trauma and mental health.
3898	"It is a mini washing plant used in places where people have worked for many years, and the waste that is left over is what we wash to get the gold," says Roland, who chairs an association of mine owners who use kata-kata machines here.
3899	It is an indictment of the Northern Ireland Office and of this government.”
3900	It is a progressive “tax” that solves the gap between the rich and the poor.
3901	‘It is a re-run of old arguments —who is good at picking things up quickly, who is responsive, on time, all of that.
3902	“It is a tragedy for this country that our president put personal politics above his sacred oath,” Mr. Biden said.
3903	It is becoming increasingly commonplace though, to the point that Japan has been actively negotiating international agreements to allow for more routine operations by foreign forces in Japan and vice versa.
3904	“It is clear Democrat get-out-the-vote operations started early as we see a spike in those numbers,” he said.
3905	It is close to definitional.
3906	It is difficult to comprehend who you can trust.
3907	It is easy to overlook people who have to deploy and support your solution, so never forget them!
3908	It is entirely possible to be feminine and enjoy boxing.
3909	It is essential for the continuation of social life.
3910	It is essentially aimed at ensuring that some of those security challenges are curtailed to the barest minimum as we approach the yuletide."
3911	It is expected Schneider Electric will roll out its technology across the country where appropriate properties are available.
3912	It is fair to say I have been thinking about it ever since.
3913	It is far easier to have a policy of geopolitical strategy to mess something up rather than to build something meaningful.
3914	“It is growing in its diversity every single day, and we don’t want to pretend like that’s not happening.
3915	It is important for individuals to take care of themselves, to look after their heart, and eat healthy foods while maintaining optimum levels of activity.
3916	It is important to provide extra police force to control the growing criminal activities and ensure safety of citizens.
3917	It is in such areas where education language policy is most hotly debated.
3918	It is in the stillness that we find who we truly are.
3919	" It is likely that consumers will reduce their pace of spending while keeping the economy out of recession at least through mid 2020."
3920	It is loosely inspired by the life of Alexandra David-Néel, a European explorer who traveled to Tibet.
3921	“It is mandatory for every child to read at least two books in a month from the school library….
3922	It is not known that she has been married.
3923	It is not known yet whether the Metro Company will offer financial compensation for the noise.
3924	It is not only one of the country’s surviving outdoor-mural masterworks, its classical composition compared to that of Diego Rivera and Giotto.
3925	It is now falling and seems to have missed the midweek rain, so fingers crossed.
3926	It is no wonder that this bespectacled man, who was affected by polio in his childhood, had become a recognised Parliamentarian despite hailing from a backward-village in Mahbubnagar.
3927	“It is one block usually that is a quilt block pattern painted on plywood and then installed on the barn or the building.”
3928	“It is on record that we ran the most organised and issue-driven campaign and our people, having been convinced of our ability to walk the talk freely gave me their mandate in the election.
3929	It is on this day, most Indians are in a rush to buy gold, silver and other precious metals.
3930	It is particularly beneficial to use a UPS in tandem with a generator, which ensures that your devices remain running while the generator kicks in.
3931	It is pertinent to note here that India has acted very responsibly and has not closed any air space nor has it sailed out any naval ships nor did it ever target the military installations in that country.
3932	“It is possible that Qatar could scale back its links with the Muslim Brotherhood, but it is certainly not planning on reducing its diplomatic ties with Turkey and Iran as trust between Doha and other GCC countries has been severely damaged.”
3933	It is possible to ship letter using the aim of requesting the firm into the firm.
3934	"It is pretty unusual to announce drivers in July.
3935	It is prevalent in suburban fringes.
3936	It is putting lives and livelihoods at risk unnecessarily and it is wantonly endangering the integrity of the United Kingdom.
3937	It is right of the consumer as he is paying for the electricity, he said.
3938	It is sleek and small enough to be carried in your pocket as a mobile fingerprint reader or placed solidly at a workstation as a traditional desktop reader.
3939	It is thanks to the great work of the 20th century scientist A. Fleming, whom introduced the first ever antibiotic (penicillin) that bacteria is forced to succumb to the over a century long war.
3940	It is the first significant rainfall since April but Bureau of Meteorology forecaster Helen Kirkup warned we are unlikely to see that type of downpour across the state.
3941	It is the ideal community to stay for a week, or own a vacation home and visit throughout the year.
3942	It is, therefore, important for the consumer to be well informed about the goods or services(s) that they are are purchasing, and protect their own interests.
3943	It is the right of every ex-militants to be trained and nobody can deny them that right,” he assured.
3944	“It is the service secretaries who signed the agreements with the companies,” Field said.
3945	It is time to keep your appointment with the Wicker Man”.
3946	It is time to properly consider civil parking enforcement.”
3947	“It is true that everyone will have to compromise.
3948	It is truly a world of wine out there, and whittling the myriad selections down will be a fun and awesome challenge, especially when tailored to the wishes and wants of each resident of 30 Warren.
3949	“It is un-American to think we can’t disagree,” Mr. Harris said.
3950	"It is unfortunate that the printer has been arrested without arresting the main culprit," requests politician not to bring politics in sports.
3951	“It is unknown whether there might be some particular diet or exercise which can help relocate fat.
3952	It is usually not possible to purchase alternative cryptocurrencies such as EVOS directly using US dollars.
3953	It is usually not presently possible to buy alternative cryptocurrencies such as Engine directly using US dollars.
3954	It is well known in the diaspora community that DFCP is also underwritten by Madison Life of Zambia and is available to diaspora Zambians worldwide.
3955	It is what the law says that is important.
3956	“It just put people on notice that I’m an artist who does many things,” he said in an interview in his dressing room.
3957	It just sort of worked for us, I guess!
3958	It just wasn’t visible to the naked eye.
3959	It’ll be broadcast at a key moment in the process of narrowing down the field of candidates in the race for Downing Street.”
3960	“It’ll make one banger of a story,” he said.
3961	It looked innocuous, but Foran was in agony as he got up, before being taken down the tunnel.
3962	It looks pretty cool.
3963	It makes for an interesting issue that has fans cringing at the thought of losing the beloved nickel-corner who should one day be in the Broncos’ Ring of Fame.
3964	It may appear disorienting that Kanye West, at age 42, has made a hard turn toward worship music.
3965	It may not have exactly been a hit, but at least it inspired its own bizarre subculture of memes.
3966	It may sound obvious, but many couples don’t think ahead with these day-to-day, real life situations, and it can lead to disagreements.
3967	It means a reprieve for now for the jobs located at the Limerick studios.
3968	“It might take weeks or months because most of the vehicles’ parts are imported.
3969	It nabbed $3.5 million in opening night previews and should take in between $25 and $30 million over the weekend.
3970	It not only gets you to the same place, but it allows you to share the experience of that particular show with one another.
3971	I told her she needs to start learning now.
3972	I told myself it did not matter.
3973	I told the person that the Vice President will do no such thing.
3974	“I told the players I can’t sit there.
3975	I told the team the other night, ‘When I was a sophomore in high school we won one game my sophomore year and we beat the state championship team that only lost one game and won 32 straight.
3976	I told the truth and the answer's "no".'
3977	“It opens doors to scholarships and more.
3978	It operates through four segments: Learning Solutions, Professional & Technical Services, Sandy Training & Marketing, and Performance Readiness Solutions.
3979	It plans to build an additional cloud region in Las Vegas.
3980	"It probably matches the World Cup, to be honest," Stokes told Sky.
3981	It probably still isn’t, but the Red Sox out of its starters during the first run through the rotation.
3982	It projects 55 seats for the Scottish National Party and 13 seats for the Liberal Democrats, both parties that want to stop Brexit.
3983	It promises to treat people within eight weeks.
3984	It provided me with a great opportunity to mentally prepare for my presentation.
3985	It reads “Welcome to Bayou Barbary.
3986	It really has almost unmatched scale on the content side.
3987	It remains to be seen what the Arrowverse version of Barry Allen's final fate will be.
3988	“It reminds me of the classic Sarychev Peak astronaut photograph of an eruption in the Kuriles from about ten years ago.”
3989	I tried to quit once and leave the business entirely.
3990	I tried to remove the string around her neck.
3991	“I truly feel every job I have had has led me to where I am now,” Loeffler said.
3992	I truly think it's amazing that US Bank Stadium and the Minnesota Vikings are trying to make the football experience an inclusive place for all fans.
3993	It runs Android Pie with Funtouch OS 9 on top.
3994	I trust that you are looking for some for men because you ended up on this article.
3995	Its 1.8 litre engine is fuel efficient as it is engineered to cover a distance of 16 kilometers per litre of petrol.
3996	It’s 24/7/365, free and confidential.) Remember that what you have to say is valuable and that you are worth listening to!
3997	“It’s a big, diverse thing.
3998	It’s a bigger pay-off when we finally do see Héloïse because the film teases the audience with the promise of her image.
3999	"It's a big pleasure having him here supporting."
4000	It’s about kicking our addiction to avoidable single-use plastic, and changing the system that produces it."
4001	"It's a concern for having a healthy and productive workforce, but it's also concerning for the strain that it's going to put on our hospital system," Ms Martin said.
4002	“It’s a criminal offence to deface or damage election posters according to the Electoral Act.
4003	” It’s a critic’s pick.
4004	'It's a disaster waiting to happen'
4005	It’s a fascinating example of humans and machines working together to produce something new.
4006	It's a good score, just not much of a show.
4007	"It's a great experience and he's a great player.
4008	It’s a great experience for them.
4009	It said "Latrine".
4010	It’s also a blue collar story that isn’t just about being poor in East Texas, but that desperation informs everything that happens in this wacky yet soulful series.
4011	“It’s also a word that represents the various shades and colours in the band, meaning it’s the perfect metaphor for our different points of view and perspectives but together, they somehow join to work perfectly.”
4012	It's also usually far cheaper in terms of compliance and administration costs to set up in smaller locations like Bahrain than in major financial hubs, said Ramachandran.
4013	It's also worth noting that Halsey didn't just perform "Sucker" in the Live Lounge — she gave her raging new single "" a stripped-back rendition that's equally as beautiful.
4014	It’s always wise not to plan one long tour of Rajasthan.
4015	It’s always worth a read to be inspired by his vision for a more humane society.
4016	It’s a manufacturer that started out as being Volvo’s performance arm, but it’s now separated to become its own carmaker, which will merely focus on electrified models.
4017	It’s an all-archive movie, but it feels fresh.
4018	It’s a natural desire and it’s fine that someone wants to get rich.
4019	It’s a neo-Western that takes the motifs of the old cowboy movies and transplants them into a modern setting.
4020	“It’s an honour for us to be in the same category as Jack Nicklaus and Arnold Palmer,” tournament host Woods said.
4021	It’s an important mission, and their support of anti-bullying efforts is something that is very important in our schools today.’
4022	It’s an interesting time to invest in electric two-wheelers.
4023	“It’s an opportunity for someone to take up the spot and put their hands up.
4024	"It's a pretty drastic move on her part, to take this step, we don't know where the chips will fall at the end of the day," he said.
4025	It’s a pretty safe bet they’ll pass on that one too.
4026	It’s a privilege when a manager goes to a club and feels that happiness in relation to the squad he’s going to have.
4027	It’s a puckish and engrossing movie, fulsome but light on its rocket feet.
4028	It's a quick 30 second video that shows 3 wolves walking by the trail cam.
4029	“It’s a red card, he knows it,” said Watson.
4030	It’s a shame he threw an intercept but I thought prior to that his runs were great, and then as soon as we saw an opportunity to get Cody get back on when we needed a few tries, he came on and did a great job.
4031	It’s as if the entire populations of California, Texas, Florida and New York all decided to go swimming in the same spot together.
4032	It’s a sound one can make without saying a word.
4033	It’s a successor to a similar type instrument that gathered data about Jupiter’s atmospheric conditions before being crushed by Jupiter’s atmospheric pressure in December 1995.
4034	It’s a trite – and inaccurate – ending, though I suppose they needed something to go with the footage of snow leopards mating.
4035	“It’s at the forefront of their minds,” said Harry Dietz, director of enterprise risk management at the National Roofing Contractors Association in Rosemont.
4036	It’s August, so if this theory is true, the tour would begin in February 2020.
4037	It’s a venue for all ages, and everyone is welcome to enjoy the music.
4038	"It's a very serious crime in the Canadian military."
4039	It’s, bang, in our net.
4040	It’s basically crashing a rocket into an asteroid hurtling towards the Earth in the hope that it would be enough to deflect it from its path and save the planet.
4041	It’s been a meteoric rise for Smith, who suffered a broken tibia playing baseball as a freshman at Notre Dame Prep in Scottsdale, then broke his arm that fall playing football.
4042	It’s been moon madness lately and Sunday night will be more of the same as a big, bright orange Hunter’s Moon lights up our area.
4043	It's believed that Misurata native GNA Deputy Prime Minister Ahmed Maiteeq represents a guardian of his city's interests at the state level.
4044	It's changed for many reasons.
4045	"It's clear to see that Ole is building a team to win trophies.
4046	Its Coastal GasLink pipeline would run from northern B.C. through the Wet’suwet’en territory to LNG Canada’s $40 billion export terminal in Kitimat.
4047	“It’s combatting this notion of Africa as a place that technology needs to happen.
4048	It’s common to mistake doing something for being productive.
4049	Its contract operation services include personnel, equipment, tools, materials, and supplies.
4050	It’s cool to be going together, but we might butt heads more by spending four more years together.”
4051	“It’s crazy,” Nash said after the race.
4052	Its creators were relatively early into the now-booming fiction podcast scene, but the show still stands out (especially in the U.K.) because of its high production standards, its ambitious scope and cast size, and its extremely loyal fanbase.
4053	“It’s crucial to our economy and also to the sustainability of our lifestyle.”
4054	Its culture has been, for centuries, exceedingly aggressive, bellicose, and extremist: “You are with us, that is ‘under us’, or you are against us.
4055	Its Cycle Tracking feature tracks the menstrual cycle and the Noise app detects the volumes levels which also notifies if the sound reaches a decibel level of 90. The new watchOS also comes with new dynamic watch faces along with several other tweaks.
4056	It’s decked out with swings, whimsical birdhouses designed to mimic historical Curtis Park homes, and teepee-like structures decorated by the Ladies Fancywork Society.
4057	It’s difficult to find just one specific stat to fully capture how overpowering the Utes were on both sides of the ball.
4058	It’s difficult to see how any of these names would register as a real shock in the final eight.
4059	It's difficult to tell a grandiose dystopian sci-fi tale in such short doses, which centers around.
4060	It’s easy to see why this ending wasn’t the one that’s used, but it does more roundly reflect the film’s overall themes.
4061	It seemed the Astros would begin rolling in the fifth, but Altuve grounded into a double play with one out while Kyle Tucker was on third and Martin Maldonado was on first.
4062	"It seems like I get off one antibiotic, and three days later, I have another one," she says.
4063	It seems likely since B&B’s trying to redeem her and she needs a way to make headway with the Logan clan.
4064	It seems to have worked – and, sadly, I'm sure Dylan truly believes what she says.
4065	It’s exciting and humbling to be reminded each day just how passionately everybody cares.
4066	It's expected to weaken before landfall Saturday.
4067	It’s fair to say that I am not posh enough for the powerband.
4068	It’s finally time for Simba and the rest of pride to say goodbye to the South African box office after charting for more than two months.
4069	Its first such in Hyderabad, the facility was inaugurated by IT and Industries Secretary Jayesh Ranjan on Monday.
4070	It's for the community.
4071	It's frustrating when you want to give a little something to help the homeless, but don't have any shrapnel on you.
4072	It’s fun to be out there with them,” Chase said.
4073	It’s going to be really hard to be strength-based and positive.’
4074	“It’s going to look like this for possibly the next three games,” coach Paul Maurice said.
4075	It’s gotten to the point where a consultant who advises companies on gender and diversity issues has had to explicitly tell men in management that it is illegal to deliberately avoid their female subordinates.
4076	“It’s hard being the daughter of an iconic movie star, but I’m not here to talk about my mother…
4077	'It's hard to describe, but every part of me ached.
4078	It's hard to imagine someone spying in Iran for Israel without ironclad faith.
4079	Its health minister has called on other countries on the continent to do the same, admitting that placing strict controls on the drug had proved ineffective.
4080	It's Hogg who has the chance to build some momentum down the right but the pass is just behind him and the referee blows up for a knock-on.
4081	It should be breathable too to ensure that there’s enough airflow going around.
4082	It should be noted; business licenses require an ordinance to be ratified while building permits are enacted through a simple resolution.
4083	It should be very easy to understand that this mess is politically motivated.
4084	It shouldn’t have surprised me really as most writers have cats for some reason, Hemmingway was notorious for his cats in Cuba and e.e. cummings went so far as to write about them extensively, but I’m a bit off topic.
4085	“It’s ideal in minimizing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases () and the risk of pregnancy, although the method is not completely foolproof – depending on how much clothing you keep on.”
4086	“It’s important to acknowledge that telemedicine like this can be a workaround, but at the end of the day, it can’t entirely be a substitute for clinic-based care,” Donovan said.
4087	It’s important to educate yourself about these issues and to start a conversation.
4088	It’s incredible how the European Tour, during a tournament week remind you, bring together all of these top players and have them participate and act in these sorts of videos.
4089	It’s interesting because many of the oil companies are basing their budgets on $50 a barrel oil.
4090	It’s interesting the unintended consequences that happen from it.
4091	It’s in the kababs, the stews, the desserts, and even the tea.
4092	It's just now the batteries are efficient.
4093	It’s just that I want to make sure that it fully has the personality of the Endless games before I give it credit for that.
4094	“It’s kind of embarrassing,” she said.
4095	Its launch date was August 31st, 2016.
4096	It’s lazy and, more to the point, now debunked.”
4097	It’s like a blanket you can wear.
4098	It’s like Belichick is really good at this coaching thing or something.
4099	It's like the matrix is adding new things.
4100	It’s long past time for the politicians we elect to show some leadership and make a decision on this community-building capital project.
4101	It's mad time, so a flashing like might do it," said Lavender.
4102	It’s mine, it”s free, and it’s a way of thinking.
4103	"It's mostly anything that I can do via email or via text message, but I always make sure that my kids have my devoted time.
4104	Its motive, on the other hand, isn’t hard to glean.
4105	“It’s my job to bring in a winning mentality,” Hummels told Kicker magazine.
4106	It’s Nancy Pelosi’s smile that gets me…oh, and not in a good way.
4107	It’s necessary for you to know why you are writing an individual, before making a cover letter.
4108	… It’s nice to have those two linemates and it’s even nicer when it’s not just you that’s scoring.
4109	It’s nice when politicians can poke fun at themselves.
4110	It’s no surprise that the Pleasance bags some of the best – its sister venue in Edinburgh is one of the main venues for Fringe performances.
4111	It’s not a funny thing,” Oliver told the newspaper.
4112	It’s not a good sign for perch fishing when you park at Steelworkers Park and are the only vehicle.
4113	It's not all about England as the PRO14 semi finals took place at the weekend with Glasgow and Leinster coming out on top against Ulster and Munster respectively.
4114	It’s not an exact posting of my whole life.
4115	It's not because I don't know the answers to these questions," he said.
4116	It’s not clear if DeBarros has an attorney.
4117	It's not enough to not make things worse, our buildings and our actions have to make things better.
4118	It’s not every time, but once we want to play out, we make sure we enjoy ourselves, we just have one life to live.
4119	“It’s not fun to lose, not fun to watch when you’re playing that way.
4120	It’s not Halloween, but J. Cole just dropped a spooky new video for his track, ‘Middle Child.’
4121	“It’s not just affecting the life of the common man — they’re so scary; they’re hounding people.
4122	“It’s not like we can see magma rising and make predictions that it’s a 50% change in a day or 75% change in the next hour.
4123	It’s not like we used to spend $150,000 to $500,000 to make a record.
4124	It’s not suitable for everyone, but there are some advantages you might want to consider.
4125	It's not thanking an idea of a God for providing it.
4126	‘It’s not that big of a deal.
4127	It’s not the most stylish version of a dark mode we’ve seen, but it reduces eye strain and gives users the alternative they’ve been waiting for.
4128	It’s not the thick strips of bread that have become shorthand for focaccia in the United States.
4129	It’s not to say that they became less rich today.
4130	“It’s odd in that it doesn’t address the initial problem, and that is the judge making a decision on a case where he knows one of the party’s relatives,” said CBS 2’s legal analyst Irv Miller.
4131	It’s only fitting that these two most colossal of all figures in a long line of gigantic characters of the Chicago Bears will forever be immortalized,” Hampton said.
4132	Its opening day of $107.8 million (including midnight shows) was the biggest of all-time.
4133	It’s our uniform, our hair shirt, our wet badge of courage.
4134	It’s overwhelming just because of what has transpired,” Woods said in the Green Jacket ceremony in the Butler Cabin.
4135	It’s past time for Washington to catch up with states like Idaho, Louisiana, and Texas and prevent dangerous individuals from purchasing ammunition.”
4136	It spent its first three weeks at No. 1 on the chart.
4137	Its platforms enable sellers to organize and offer their inventory for sale; and buyers to find and purchase it virtually.
4138	"It's pretty ancient technology," said Tate.
4139	It’s probably some technical issue on the website.
4140	Its PURE solution has been used on PrimaLoft Gold Insulation, 100 percent post-consumer recycled material, without compromising insulation or performance benefits.
4141	It’s quite a lot for one house, but it suits her and her three housemates, two of whom are artists.
4142	It's quite another when a child fears going to school because they may not come home.
4143	It’s really chilling to watch.
4144	It's really difficult wearing a hijab, particularly during the heatwave with my helmet on.
4145	It's referred to as the "Magic Kaito Organization" in some circles but that seems like it implies Kaito is actually running the group rather than fighting it.
4146	It’s replacing Edge’s internals with Google’s open-source Chromium code.
4147	It’s reported that while his wife and thirteen others were pleading guilty Monday afternoon, William H. Macy was spotted in a Los Angeles shopping mall garage leaving on his motorcycle.
4148	Its roots in the U.S. go back hundreds of years.
4149	It's scary if you have to mark him.
4150	It's scary stuff, and the fact that it was so widely-used made the dangers it posed that much more real.
4151	Its score of 32 out of 100 on the index, which is widely used by companies when deciding where to do business, indicates Ukraine has serious corruption issues.
4152	It's short on features -- you won't find any macro keys -- and there's no software to install.
4153	"It's so ingenious," he said.
4154	It’s something that we can fix and we’re going to fix.
4155	“It’s so much more of an expensive and emotionally damaging model.”
4156	“It’s still a bit of a taboo topic and some women feel they shouldn’t masturbate, especially in a relationship.
4157	It’s still fairly sleek and lightweight, though, and its internal battery provides up to 12 hours of juice, giving you more than enough for a day’s worth of work and entertainment.
4158	It’s still very early but happy to hear that!
4159	It’s still what he loves to do and that’s inspiring to me, that you can be a pop star for 40 plus years straight and still have a genuine interest and love and respect for the craft.”
4160	It's Strange's last resort, because both Eternity and the Living Tribunal won't intervene despite Strange's pleas.
4161	It’s strange then that my most vivid memory of the place is of an unexpected moment of hope.
4162	“It started out as this small gathering of motorcycle enthusiasts who just wanted to get together,” says Bike Week co-owner Lisa Cyr.
4163	“It starts in the newsroom, where we need to talk more often and more openly about the state of journalism and how we fit into it.”
4164	It starts with a disaster: The Metropolitan Museum of Art has been bombed, and 13-year-old Theo Decker (a remarkable ) loses his mother in the attack.
4165	“It’s the best the market has ever been for plant-based food,” he said.
4166	“It’s the intersection of how good it is and how affordable it is for the guest to have it.”
4167	It’s the island of Kabaena’s annual indigenous culture festival, and its residents are afraid that if the tradition comes to an end, the island will be relinquished to mining companies.
4168	It’s time for a change, it’s time to make Bristol a better place.
4169	It’s time for those like Colbert King and The Washington Post’s editorial team to reckon with the simple fact that sex work is going to happen no matter what, and keeping it illegal promotes the exploitation of the people he pretends to care about.
4170	It’s time to turn around and see the darkness that the Fed sees looming over you.
4171	It’s true that resumes would be the most essential tool which you might use whenever seeking to turn into an application for work.
4172	It's unclear when or how the 40-year-old actor was able to get out — since he didn't give any updates — but he's safe and sound now.
4173	It’s unclear whether Folk will be healthy enough to play this weekend.
4174	It’s up to me to do the rest and I feel like I can do that.”
4175	'It's very difficult to be a conservative in Hollywood.
4176	It’s what you get a glimpse of in the new poster, also released at the convention today.
4177	It’s worse that people who claim the mantle of conservatism defend them.
4178	It’s worth remembering that Sondland has long been a suspicious character in the Trump-Ukraine drama.
4179	It takes fairly less time to reach out to the target group.
4180	It therefore seems to me that the person who did, or may have been doing, Massa’s binding or wishes was Lennox Linton.
4181	It took a set-piece but you have to say that for a game as important as this we have to come out with more energy at the outset.”
4182	It took years for her to trust any adult, said Recinos — whose book on her journey is called “Hindsight: Coming of Age on the Streets of Hollywood” — and to believe that My Friend’s Place was really trying to help her.
4183	It trapped many inside the building, with some shouting for help from windows on high floors or from the roof.
4184	“It turned out to be the nearest you can get to perfection.
4185	It turns out that not paying debts makes lenders very unwilling to lend more.
4186	It waited for a black group to assemble.
4187	“It was a bit scary at first, I mean I wasn’t near the accident, but it was still scary just seeing an accident and seeing that whole situation unfold,” she said.
4188	It was a different story for Men’s Health Australia editor Scott Henderson.
4189	It was a document that served as an endorsement of a broad vision for an expansive federal effort to tackle climate change.
4190	It was a good choice too and the Koosh ball became the best selling toy of 1987.
4191	“It was a great day, we got to mingle with all the kids and just see how much excitement and joy they have in their life,” Oscar Allen said in a team video.
4192	It was a kind of leap of faith since Nutcracker is so classically based in ballet.”
4193	“It was a lot bigger than anything we ever imagined.
4194	It was also a devastating cultural trauma: the end of the last strains of a certain kind of 1960s idealism and 1970s radicalism.
4195	It was also a nice bit of nostalgia hearing Tony Schiavone calling a War Games-like match.
4196	It was also learnt that Maina was interrogated over his choice assets in Kado Estate, Abuja, some properties in Kaduna and a large farm in Keffi, the Nasarawa State capital.
4197	It was also noted it would be a savings over $200,000 to the county if this agreement was approved.
4198	It was a move so radical, so unorthodox, that a term had to be coined — or at least borrowed from Italy — to explain it.
4199	"It was an engaging discussion on relations & viewers would have enjoyed it.
4200	'It was an investment for our future and an investment going forward for the children.'
4201	It was a rare uplifting moment on an ugly night in Bulgaria.
4202	“It was a ticket logjam before that.”
4203	“It was definitely hard,” she said.
4204	It was full-on, hardcore and we had a great time.”
4205	“It was fun to see all those runners coming at once and such different sizes.
4206	It was good to go out there again and compete.”
4207	"It was hard convincing people to incorporate it into their projects," she said.
4208	It was his fifth goal for Canada and, he acknowledged, the biggest of his young career.
4209	It was his small bag of stars he seemed to say as he squinched his eyes shut, raised his shoulders a bit, tilted his head and made the sweetest smile ever.
4210	It was in 2006 when the museum shifted to the Hamilton Building and architect Daniel Libeskind designed it.
4211	It was kinda fantastically bizarre, almost spooky.
4212	“It was kind of an open secret,” said Jennifer Freeman, one of the lawyers bringing the case under a recent change in New York law that opened a one-year window for victims to sue over abuse they say happened decades ago.
4213	“It was like a cultural rabbit hole that needed exploring,” Payne said.
4214	"It was literally a dream come true," he says.
4215	It was my first surgery, ever, and I was nervous.
4216	It was nominated for five Academy Awards.
4217	It was not until the eve of the premier’s return this weekend that CNS was able to get confirmation that, given the deputy premier’s recent family loss, Finance Minister Roy McTaggart has been acting as premier.
4218	It wasn’t really formalized as a company.
4219	‘It was one of the most amazing moments of my life – just watching something that I thought was irreparably damaged and then seeing the new episode.’
4220	It was part of the City Commission’s public “thanks” to the crews that worked to restore Branham Avenue.
4221	“It was pitch black and I had just woken up from the crash and I didn’t know what was going on.”
4222	“It was really amazing to see S’bu play on an international level knowing where it all started from wearing a black and white jersey to wearing the green and gold jersey,” said Park.
4223	"It was really some times I was at home depressed," he shares.
4224	"It was really the first reality show, because whatever happened we took advantage of it."
4225	It was, said Crown, in a lengthy missive signed by its entire board, a “deceitful campaign” of “poor or misleading journalism”.
4226	It was sent by a son to his parents.
4227	It was supposed to play out like the Nixon Watergate hearings.
4228	It was the biggest performance of the season for an Ohio State offense that has outdone itself each week through the first four games.
4229	It was the injustice in the execution of the plan that led to the current agitation.
4230	It was then returned to its owner.
4231	It was then that she took a bathroom break, shedding a few tears as she willed herself to bounce back.
4232	It was the perfect private pool: remote-controlled Jacuzzi, underwater lights, a giant swan float, turquoise water glinting in the California sunshine.
4233	It was the same scene in 1988, in the first game of the World Series, when the Dodgers trailed going into their final at-bat.
4234	It was tied at 3-3 when Olson singled off Collin McHugh (3-5) with one out in the 11th, before Mark Canha walked.
4235	“It was tight-knit and there was always a scene.
4236	It was widely considered among the most important inside-the-beltway programs.
4237	It will also determine whether or not it is funded by the State of Oklahoma.
4238	It will be a battle of the Trojans' receivers and the Utes' defensive backs Friday night in LA.
4239	It will be a good battle.
4240	It will be breezy with wind from the west gusting to around 25 or 30 mph.
4241	“It will be good for him – and for anyone else – if he stops eating after 6.30.
4242	It will make a superb restaurant with sea views.
4243	It will only be a month or two of interruptions as all will quiet down after the setting begins and their nightly conversations will end.
4244	“It will take us about six months to a year to find the right location,” he said.
4245	It works as advertised but it does also increase the vibrations you’ll feel.
4246	It works to give you harder erections that are also long lasting.
4247	It would also have an immediate and dramatic impact on financial markets, investment, prices and jobs,” Soros, who is 85, said in the Guardian.
4248	It would barely impact it — and that assumes that malevolent actors wouldn’t just switch to handguns or other long-barrel weapons.
4249	"It would be easier, it would happen more rapidly if we had the state's support and I would welcome that assistance."
4250	'It would be the topic of conversation most nights at the dinner table - how we were going to get the money together, what was going to happen next and how it was making us feel.
4251	It would be unimaginable without Anthony Hopkins and Jonathan Pryce in the lead, as Pope Benedict XVI and Cardinal Jorge Mario Bergoglio (aka Pope Francis) respectively.
4252	'It would be wrong for patients to say 'I'm getting a tiny bit of an ache, I can't do 36 holes of golf, it's going to fall apart in three to four years, so why don't I get it done before it fails?'
4253	“It would count as a success if — against the odds — the G-7 leaders were to emphasize areas of cooperation instead of just setting out their differences individually.
4254	It would levy a $27 fee on students each semester to create a fund for the descendants of 272 slaves sold by the university's Jesuit founders in 1838 to pay off debt.
4255	I understand that public view towards LGBTQ+ folks has changed in 10 years, and it’s entirely possible that those former bullies are changed, reformed, and open-minded.
4256	"I urge citizens to be calm but vigilant and update their family's plan," Vazquez said.
4257	I use business language and make sure everyone understands how technology helps us attain Hydro-Québec’s strategic objectives,” she said.
4258	I used to feel that a bit at City: I wouldn’t say it was easy but come 70 minutes their mind-set would be ‘we’re against City, we’ll never win’.
4259	I used to hate facial hair, but then it grew on me.
4260	“I’ve been developing an exciting concept and solution to this challenge that I know the neighborhood would love and appreciate and I want to bring back to my retail space where I’ve spent 11 years.”
4261	I've been drafted into 'operation no deal'.
4262	“I've been in the office a couple of times with him, talking about this, and he said, ‘Look, Mick, this is a corrupt place.
4263	"I've been reading, for almost 60 years, explorations of possible new technologies."
4264	‘I’ve been talking about it all day, everyone is being nice and I am just thinking “oh God”,’ she said as she broke down.
4265	"I’ve done a lot of thinking and soul searching over the last week and I’m a passionate guy, that’s got me the career I’ve had.
4266	“I’ve enjoyed watching the play evolve nicely,” Berezay said.
4267	I’ve got another chemo next week and we’ll do a review and see where things stand.”
4268	I’ve got to turn some of my attention to the making of this movie.
4269	“I’ve just been trying to get stronger, make sure I’m healthy, make sure I don’t do anything dumb to get hurt like dive for a ball in a practice,” he said.
4270	I’ve learned so much about this process, and it’s just a really unfair situation that so many people are in right now, and we’re hoping that this show will open people’s eyes to it.
4271	“I’ve never not had a job and being involved taught me how to help other people.”
4272	“I’ve noticed that some white guys are so afraid of seeming racist,” she says, “that when I ask them if I’m their first girlfriend that’s not white, they will totally avoid answering the question by reminding me that I’m not their girlfriend.”
4273	"I've spent countless hours talking to comedians over the years, both on and off mic," said KLEIN.
4274	"I've written a lot for it and I'm excited.
4275	Ivo Shandor: King Something: Still, could be worse.
4276	I want a Thomas the Train train set.
4277	I wanted to take an improv class., I had never taken one, so I thought I had better take an improv class.
4278	“I want this matter to be resolved amicably and let’s not prolong this crisis,” he told reporters at the Aidilfitri reception hosted by his family in Kampung Gadong, near here, today.
4279	I want to keep things steady, and, as Council President, I’ve got a lot of priorities I’m working on that I want to see through.”
4280	I was a drug addict for nearly 20 years.
4281	I was a kid who couldn’t sit still.
4282	“I was already crying.
4283	I was back on country again recently for my Aunty’s funeral.
4284	I was captivated by Gerard's passion and his extraordinary ability to remember lines.
4285	"I was caught off guard, but it was such a cool thing and a special moment.
4286	“I was diagnosed at two years old, back in 1987,” Danielle says.
4287	I was first introduced to Rochester native and essayist Sonja Livingston's frank, lovely, philosophic writing with her 2009 book, "Ghostbread," in which she brought readers into the inside of growing up poor.
4288	“I was involved in porn so briefly, but my actions spread like wildfire, and I continue to be ranked (truly baffles me) 5 years after leaving the industry”, she revealed on Twitter.
4289	“I was just coming on to that,” said Mr Barclay before changing the subject back to the Commons voting.
4290	"I was just denied AISH."
4291	I was like, ‘Oh crap.’
4292	I was never sure exactly what Rick was, certainly he seemed to bounce around Western Canada a lot, Victoria, Revelstoke, Banff, you just never know where Rick will turn up next.
4293	I wasn't even political.
4294	"I wasn't just his brother, or the drummer in Frightened Rabbit, and anyone who did see me like that saw me in a different light.
4295	I wasn’t sick, I was just brushing my teeth one night and I could see it and I thought it was tonsillitis,” Ms Bubb told The Spectator.
4296	I was perfectly healthy.
4297	I was really humiliated even though he told me to stop it in a civilised way.
4298	'I was shocked when I heard the news.
4299	I was so nervous to walk into the studio even.
4300	I was submitted to sodium pentothal “truth serum” to confirm my statements relating to the flight and accident.
4301	I was thrilled not least because it was always a great feeling to find people who wanted to be active in furthering the gospel.
4302	I was told by Facebook that my comment was deemed "offensive."
4303	'I was unsure of how our dynamics as a family was going to change now that we had a son who burnt easily in the sun and would most likely be legally blind.
4304	“I was unsure who he wanted,” she testified, noting the other customers were with the other man and Settles dispute was only with her and the one man.
4305	“I watch other races a bit but Dad probably couldn’t care less.
4306	I went on Day 3, and it’s definitely something that’s fueled me since I’ve been here.”
4307	“I will always miss you.
4308	I will have to learn the Italian term.
4309	“I wish Bukom Banku good luck but if anytime he wants to fight, I’m ready for him.
4310	I wish to do it!
4311	Iwobi has admitted he relishes playing through the middle, despite regularly starting out wide.
4312	I wonder what happens if their internal hegemony ever snaps.
4313	I won't be able to spot this Wi-Fi tracking machine out of the crowd anymore.
4314	I work, I don’t have time because of work.
4315	I WOULD FAINT,” another wrote.
4316	I would love to have resources on-hand that help me stray away from the negative coping mechanisms I’ve used before, which could range from nail biting to self harm.
4317	"I wouldn't change one effing thing about you.
4318	I wouldn’t hold your breath on the Eagles acquiring but they could sure use that guy, huh?
4319	“I would play up top in the midfield once in a while but this has definitely been different and I just love it.
4320	I would rather ditch him and use the money on another lineman than see another failed position change.
4321	"I would say my chest felt like it was collapsing and tightening up and I couldn't breathe," he added.
4322	“I would say Texas definitely rolled out the red carpet for me today on my visit.
4323	"I would urge you to honour your agreement of yesterday to step back from any involvement given it is an employment matter."
4324	Jackalope South Shore, 1523 Tinnin Ford Road, Austin, Texas.
4325	“Jack loves football, he comes from a long line of football players,” Andy Hoffman said.
4326	Jackson and Boudreaux also contributed on offense.
4327	Jackson knows a thing or two about watching a great pass rusher work.
4328	Jackson Michie had mentioned to Jack Matthews, again, that Kat and Holly Allen had an alliance outside of the house.
4329	Jaden Bryner, who served a mission in Chicago about a decade ago, said he thinks the change will help missionaries who suffer with depression and loneliness.
4330	Jahan had come in the firing line of Muslim clergy after she was seen sporting ‘sindoor’ (vermilion) while taking oath in the Parliament as the new MP.
4331	Jalee Baumann, 15, is obsessed with Mariah Carey's, "Obsessed."
4332	Jalopnik has reached out to Mercedes-Benz concerning the delay and will update when we have more.
4333	James Gray’s marvel of a paranoid thriller, antagonistically serene, otherworldly yet wholly concrete is an uncommon attainment of visual and sonic beauty, ready and ripe to be madly misunderstood.
4334	James then scored a hattrick for Speyside in their Intercol quarterfinal contest against Roxborough Secondary, which they won 8-1 on 7 November.
4335	James was born in Salina, Kansas on May 22, 1936, a son of the late Virginia N and Isaac J. Haley.
4336	James was the victim of poor tackles in the wins over Perth Glory and Inter Milan but Solskjaer admires the youngster’s determination to beat the bully boys.
4337	Jamie Bell gives Bernie Taupin compassion, a bit of awkwardness, and love.
4338	Jammu and Kashmir Governor SP Malik had earlier dismissed speculations that the Centre might be planning to do away with Article 35A of the Constitution, which gives exclusive rights to the state's residents in government jobs and land.
4339	Jandreau started in all 36 games that she played in as a junior.
4340	Jane Street Group LLC owned approximately 0.58% of Auris Medical as of its most recent SEC filing.
4341	Jane Street Group LLC purchased a new stake in shares of Fate Therapeutics during the 2nd quarter valued at $116,000.
4342	Janhvi Kapoor, Arjun Kapoor, Kriti Sanon, Jacqueline Fernandez, Sophie Choudry among others in today's spotting.
4343	Janice Dalton, 61, teamed up with aspiring property developer Susan Taylor for the venture in 2013, but was accused of abandoning the renovation project to go on holiday.
4344	Jan Makkreel was born on 1926 in Rotterdam, Holland and had a very happy childhood until war broke out.
4345	Japanese media said Hanako Kuribayashi, an 11-year-old girl, and 39-year-old Satoshi Oyama, a foreign ministry official, had died in hospital after being stabbed in the neck.
4346	Japan’s Cabinet Secretariat calculated that the two-way deal would bolster its real gross domestic product by 0.8 percent, but its calculations were based on the assumption that existing tariffs on Japanese car exports to the U.S. would be removed.
4347	Jared Spurgeon scored twice to lead the Wild.
4348	Jason Wright with Modus Studio, representing owner April Lee and her family, said the business team agreed with planning staff to table the item until Aug. 12 to further work out the proposal.
4349	Jasram Gurjar, 40, was the BSP candidate from Behror constituency in the 2018 state assembly elections.
4350	Jay Williams said on ESPN’s Get Up, “James Harden will score 100 points in a game this season.
4351	JEDI critics have likened it to the nefarious "Skynet" computing overlord in "Terminator" films.
4352	Jefferies Financial Group lifted their target price on shares of Haemonetics from $125.00 to $140.00 and gave the company a “buy” rating in a research report on Friday, August 2nd.
4353	Jeff has been performing since 1993 and has been with the Katahdin Valley Boys since 1998 as a founding member.
4354	Jenna Gearing said she was ‘incredibly privileged’ to be part of such an important memorial.
4355	Jennifer Garner (JG):I grew up knowing about it because my best childhood friend’s dad went to Denison.
4356	Jennifer Lopez & Daughter Emme Duet On ‘Limitless’ To Kick Off Her Tour – Hollywood LifeContinue to Hollywoodlife (
4357	Jeremy Corbyn claims he will win election 'no problem at all' and John McDonnell suggests polling is 'just.
4358	Jerome Powell took the Federal Reserve closer to cutting interest rates this month, citing risks from the trade war with China and saying June’s strong U.S. jobs report hadn’t shifted the outlook.
4359	Jerry then arrives, only to break the news that while he will forever love his Five-0 ohana, he needs to step away and embark on the next chapter of his life — writing a book connecting the Federal Reserve to the escaped Alcatraz prisoners.
4360	Jerusalem remains at the heart of the decades-long Mideast conflict, with Palestinians hoping that East Jerusalem -- occupied by since 1967 -- might one day serve as the capital of a Palestinian state.
4361	Jessen said that another major factor in the success was additional resources brought to the school because of its dipping to a 2-star ranking.
4362	Jesse shows up with Hank and Steve Gomez (Steven Michael Quezada) in tow.
4363	Jessica Parker, who also serves as the executive producer on the show, remains in business with HBO where her company, Pretty Matches Prods, has been under a first-look deal for 14 years.
4364	Jesus Christ operated under the law of his Father and observed it.
4365	Jesus is calling each one of us to be a part of the story he is telling.
4366	Jesus said to him, “Go thy way; and as thou hast believed, so be it done unto thee.
4367	Jeter said inspiration for founding the website originated from his days as a professional baseball player.
4368	“Jet is like a family.
4369	Jets: Visit Vegas on Saturday night.
4370	“Jewish history is Canadian history,” he said.
4371	Jewish Nevada works diligently to build a vibrant community and sustain Jewish life throughout Nevada, Israel, and around the world.
4372	Jim Mangold did such an extraordinary job with Logan and I loved it.
4373	Jimmy Butler Shows Up To Practice At 3:30 am!
4374	Jimmy Carter was nowhere in sight in polls taken the year before he was elected president.
4375	Jimmy Flanagan, who built the downtown Flanagan Hotel that was renamed The Senator, is another on the list.
4376	Jimmy served in the U.S. Air Force.
4377	Jim Ryan, president of Sony Interactive Entertainment, said the firm wanted to “deepen the feeling of immersion when you play games” through the controller.
4378	JIT-less mode does come with a performance penalty, however.
4379	Joanne Smith, 48, is “hopeful” that Emma-Jayne Magson, 25, will win an appeal, expected later this year, after being convicted of murdering her boyfriend in March 2016.
4380	Jodi Geddes and Kate Pollard started Circle In after their own experiences returning to work after parental leave.
4381	Joelle Walker, vice president, public affairs for the Canadian Pharmacists Association, discusses the letter sent to Health Minister Ginette Petitpas Taylor last week with RCI's Terry Haig.
4382	Joe Maddon: "I think I still have a good 3-5 (years) in me.
4383	Joe Raynes was required to slide across to make an important clearance after indecision almost saw Theobalds played in behind.
4384	Johansson's earning high marks for too, making her a viable candidate for two nominations this year.
4385	John A. Charles, Jr. is President and CEO of Cascade Policy Institute, Oregon’s free market public policy research institute.
4386	John clearly does not lack for acerbic wit himself – he once called Keith Richards “a monkey with arthritis” – but readers of Petridis’s journalism will recognise the ghostwriter’s signature turns of phrase.
4387	John described the album’s origins.
4388	“John is a big character and has a huge influence on a lot things at the club.
4389	John Lasseter directed both of the first two movies, and he and Andrew Stanton have been involved in all of the other films since.
4390	JOHN LEICESTER Associated Press HONG KONG (AP) — No tiresome wait for hugs and kisses from Mickey and Minnie Mouse.
4391	John Mudzongo, a nutritionist, said: “We are often told that we are what we eat.
4392	John Paul Coonrod is the son of current Scott County public defender John D. Coonrod.
4393	Johnson assisted on all four goals he didn’t score himself.
4394	Johnson indicated not guilty pleas to causing grievous bodily harm, dangerous driving, driving while disqualified, failing to stop and driving without insurance.
4395	Johnson, in turn, threatened to dissolve the House of Commons and hold a national election that he hopes might produce a less fractious crop of legislators.
4396	Johnson is one of more than 50 people at the Air National Guard base that are working full time as Active Guard Reserve members.
4397	Johnson later painted watercolors to accompany the haiku (figure ), which were covered by news outlets, such as ).
4398	Johnson, who is a former SWAT officer, said his former client was concerned about his own safety, but also about the wellbeing of his family -- including a newborn daughter.
4399	John Starr, a junior studying linguistics, English and Persian, was selected as one of 18 recipients across the United States of the Beinecke Scholarship.
4400	John works very hard for every child and their parents to make sure kids are getting the best education available.
4401	Join Hillside Aluminium for an informative engagement session, which will be conducted by our VCO, Calvin Mkhabela.
4402	Joining them are family members who are not yet citizens, from left, daughter Kamana, 18; son Joao, 14; and son Gabriel, 22, and Anderson Silva's wife Dayane.
4403	Joint Municipal Commissioner, general administration, Milind Sawant did not respond to calls.
4404	Join us for a concert under the stars on our Great Green, with these blues legends!
4405	Jo is the co-founder of Sage Sisters of Solidarity - a group of indigenous women united against injustice based in Davenport, Iowa.
4406	“JoJo’s Bizarre Adventure” consists of eight parts, each following a different member of the Joestar bloodline who can feasibly be nicknamed JoJo.
4407	Jones has kept him under wraps.
4408	Jones is described as a black male who is 6 feet 1 inch tall and weighs about 225 pounds.
4409	Jones says fans who travel to the Club World Cup from blockading countries risk seeing legislation invoked “arbitrarily”.
4410	Jong disagreed, describing that reasoning as "a common union-busting tactic" that game workers repeatedly hear in the industry.
4411	Jon Tuttle, director of the honors program and professor of English, said the new honors building will be beneficial for the entire community.
4412	Joolama has three paintings in the show; he learned his family's history after his mother died, met her spirit beings, witnessed the destruction by Cyclone Tracy in 1974, and thereafter visited her son through a series of dream visitations.
4413	Jo Pike, public Affairs director at the Scottish Wildlife Trust, said: "Any future reintroduction would have to be carefully planned, widely consulted on, and rigorously assessed against national and international guidelines.
4414	Jordan is the top Republican on the committee, and Meadows is the top Republican on the panel's subcommittee on government operations.
4415	JORDYN Woods claims that Tristan Thompson kissed HER at a boozy after party at the NBA player's house in LA.
4416	Joseph Gérard (Gerry) Roger Plamondon, the last surviving player to have won the Stanley Cup in 1946, died on Saturday, the club announced.
4417	Joseph Reznick, the Police Department’s deputy commissioner of internal affairs, who as a commander of detectives led the investigation for many years, recalls on the podcast why detectives pursued the case for so long.
4418	Josh and Don noted that while Bahh’s opponents have to spend extra energy to force Bahh off of them, Bahh also expends similar amounts of energy to carry around his weight.
4419	Josh Kosoff, the couple’s lawyer, said that “the problem is, you’re selling a machine gun by law.”
4420	JOSHUA BOLTEN: --which is our entitlement programs.
4421	Joshua’s favorite player is Smith-Schuster.
4422	Joyiya was arrested on 4 August in the Durban CBD, after he was found in possession of a human head.
4423	JPMorgan Chase & Co. began coverage on Boston Scientific in a research note on Thursday, September 5th.
4424	JPMorgan Chase & Co. cut their price target on shares of Nutrien from $54.00 to $50.00 and set a “neutral” rating on the stock in a report on Wednesday, October 2nd.
4425	JPMorgan Chase & Co. lifted its holdings in Sun Communities by 57.8% in the 3rd quarter.
4426	Juan Soto tied the score 2-2 leading off the fourth when he drove a high fastball on the outside corner to the opposite field and onto the train tracks in left, 417 feet away.
4427	Judge Graham Buchanan said: “You have been acquitted of this charge by the jury.
4428	Judy on April 6th, 2019 1:54 pm Congratulations Kyler.
4429	Junior captain Jeremy Courtar sets the pace and led the team in their first race posting a 5th place time of 20:03 last week against Bristol Central and Platt.
4430	Junior Mark Wilson shared his thoughts on the Restaurant.
4431	Junior midfielder Mari Devine scored two goals and netted one assist as seven different Warriors scored.
4432	Jupiter police Chief Daniel Kerr said he was shocked to learn that Kraft, who is worth $6 billion, was paying for sex inside a shopping-center massage parlor, the Orchids of Asia Day Spa.
4433	Jurors in the Megan Haynes murder trial heard a rambling, macabre audio interview Friday as prosecutors played an audiotaped interview with co-defendant Justin Reynolds.
4434	Just a few months ago, they wouldn’t have had the option, but in late 2018 Jordan announced that it was reopening a single border crossing with its war-torn neighbor to the north.
4435	Just because you have never been in a riot yourself or you don’t plan on it, doesn’t mean that you shouldn’t be prepared.
4436	Just be sure to right-click on the link above so that you can open up another tab and have it going while you chat in the comments below.
4437	Just days after being unceremoniously ousted via tweet from his job as ’s national security adviser, is resuming his political activities and endorsing Republican lawmakers who share his hawkish worldview.
4438	Just didn’t have much else to say about the expected result of Reigns/Ziggler.
4439	Just hover one icon over the top of another and watch it create a folder automatically.
4440	JUST IN: Schiphol Airport on lockdown as plane ‘hijacked by three men with knives’
4441	Just instead of a record of specified instruction assignments, it will most likely be truncateda group of courses by title, enjoy the remaining part of the headings.
4442	Justin Taite is a writer and director living in Los Angeles, CA, who is originally from Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
4443	Just last year, Armenia tossed out its pro-Russian government, installing a younger crowd that wants better ties with Europe.
4444	Just like that, week 1 is behind us and boy what a week it was.
4445	“Just like we want special status for Bihar, we have always wanted statehood for Delhi,” Kumar said.
4446	Just moved from cent IL to southern AZ.
4447	Just take the books in your hand and you won’t feel like keeping them down.
4448	Just that emblem and the old loot we’ve gotten a zillion times already.
4449	Just the one run off the over.
4450	Just the one wicket today for nearly 100 runs scored.
4451	"Just to be here tonight is a feel-good factor."
4452	Just you might call for variations of the CV for diverse sorts of positions.
4453	Juul’s use of social media influencers to promote its vaping devices in the years after it launched in 2015 also came under scrutiny.
4454	Juul, the country's dominant e-cigarette maker, has its headquarters by the San Francisco Bay — on city property, no less.
4455	Juventus FC, the Italian football club, has signed Han Kwang Song, a North Korean football player, to play as a forward on its under-23 team.
4456	Juventus moved one point ahead of Inter after seven games as they target a ninth consecutive title.
4457	JVP begins its history lesson with the Ottomans.
4458	KABUL, Afghanistan — The suicide bomber stood in the middle of the dancing, clapping crowd as hundreds of Afghan children and adults celebrated a wedding in a joyous release from Kabul’s strain of war.
4459	KACEY MUSGRAVES earned five nominations.
4460	Kachikwu disclosed this in his keynote address at the commissioning of the Nigerian Army Welfare Limited Guaranty Gas plant at Mambilla Barracks, Abuja, our correspondent reports.
4461	Kade Harpe completed a wide receiver screen to Tyrese Johnson on second down, but a block was missed, and the play failed to gain.
4462	Kahol Lavan's Benny Gantz, flanked by Gabi Ashkenazi, attend the memorial for Shimon Peres, September 19, 2019.
4463	Kaia Gerber, daughter of 90s supermodel Cindy Crawford, wore a satin bra top and black leather.
4464	KAILUA-KONA, Hawaii — An annual humpback whale count in Hawaii will take place despite the federal government shutdown.
4465	Kaley Cuoco Reveals She Almost Wasn't Cast on 'Big Bang Theory'
4466	Kalmanovitch says mainstream brands are willing to fork over these large sums for comparatively smaller brands because of the huge potential the still-developing plant-based market offers businesses.
4467	• Kansas State has been far and away the best team among FBS programs over the last 15 years when it comes to scoring via a kickoff or punt return.
4468	Kansas State split the first two games of its program-record five-match homestand.
4469	Kapil will ask John if he ever gets a chance to turn into someone else, who will he be?
4470	Karewith Casas, a fourth-year studio art and art history double major, shared how the performance related to his heritage.
4471	Karl-Anthony Towns is wreaking havoc on opposing big men and propelling his Minnesota Timberwolves to high point totals.
4472	Kasam Ali scored an own goal following a corner with two minutes gone, and then Elliot Gardner latched on to a through-ball behind Roslyn's backline two minutes later and shot past the advancing Tom Stevens in goal.
4473	Katherine notes that "takeout food makes life easier, but it's hard on the planet, with all those plastic containers used only for a brief time and then thrown away.
4474	Kauai officials acknowledge that their approval of the cutting by property owners was likely a result of misinterpreting the rules.
4475	Kawaki isn’t exactly a bad character, but the expectations for him were set so high that he was always going to let fans down.
4476	Kay quickly replied, "I haven't came (sic) close with another person lol sorry."
4477	Kazakhstan plays an active role in peacebuilding of the UN, Tokayev said.
4478	KDKA Meteorologist Kristin Emery says temperatures will hit the mid to upper 80s again today before autumn arrives at 3:50 a.m. Monday morning.
4479	Kechao Li, a Bachelor of Business Administration in management.
4480	Keep an eye on kids when they’re playing with the smart toy, particularly if it can send or receive messages.
4481	Keeping a excellent relationship with the firm you’re departing isn’t a terrible thought, as you’ll never know if you could involve some kind of help from your employer on.
4482	“Keeping in view this fact, Central/state departments/agencies/institutions may continue to consider IDBI Bank for grant of government business,” the letter said.
4483	Keeping on top of faults as they occur is a massive boon to productivity.
4484	Keep in mind that competition will dictate how long it takes to see results.
4485	Keep reading to find out what fans think about the new BioShock game in development!
4486	Kehinde Ayantunji, Chairman of Nigeria Union of Journalists in Osun, said the book is an intelligent investment and a huge consolation about the predicament of the Nigeria youths particularly the educated ones in tertiary institutions.
4487	Kempton took the lead when a Skillo Ditshego cross was superbly volleyed in by Sihle Makhubela.
4488	"Kendall and Kylie in particular can't understand why she's being so over the top and cringeworthy," a source revealed to the site.
4489	Kendall resigned as goalkeeping coach and apologised to her.
4490	Kendrick wanted to see her name in lights, and when she’s offered a lucrative contract, she thinks she’s made it.
4491	Kenneth T. MacLeish is with the Center for Medicine, Health, and Society and the Department of Anthropology, Vanderbilt University.
4492	Ken took that and ran with it, though not the Giants in particular and thinks this is Kerry Washington showing off her singing side.
4493	Keppel writes in the forewordthat, in Seattle and surrounding King County, "we didn't we had a serial killer until Ted had killed at least eight young women in the region, probably more."
4494	Kersh was stopped on Thanksgiving day for drinking alcohol in public and became verbally abusive toward the officers, police say.
4495	Kestrels are always of interest, and the kestrel that Bob Kimberly spotted at Sepiessa Point on April 2 — reported in last week’s column — was still around on April 6, spotted by Denguole Budris.
4496	Key applications include condiments, dressings, soups and fruit-flavored drinks.
4497	Key to making the move work was measuring productivity and keeping it steady, even as hours reduced, according to Andrew Barnes, Perpetual Guardian’s owner.
4498	Kher as Oberoi is the father figure of the hotel and his staff listens to him.
4499	Khuzestan was the ancient home of the empire of Elam, an independent, non-Semitic, non-Indo-European-speaking kingdom whose territory spanned almost all of present-day southwestern Iran.
4500	Kiara Advani promises her several comic moments and it’s good to see her playing such kind of character.
4501	Kick-Off Festival for DFW Free Day of Yoga – Dallas, Texas, September 1, 2018 from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.
4502	Kick-off is at 7.45pm BST.
4503	Kids Battling Cancer Honored at Candlelighters Superhero 5K — Sept. 14 at Mountain’s Edge —
4504	Kieron Sargeant, another of Sankofa’s international guest artists, created “Caribbean Suite” for the concert.
4505	Kildee, who met with House Speaker Nancy Pelosi about his proposal on Friday, hasn’t publicly released the details of his bill.
4506	King added, “We also have a suggestion area because we try to think of things people would like but, really, people have been coming to us since then saying, ‘Well, what about music lessons?’
4507	Kingsley Moghalu is either ignorant or playing petty politics.
4508	Kisumu Day then met Barding in the finals and the latter won 2-0 but afterwards, it emerged again that Agutu was not happy with Barding’s squad and he once appealed for what was alleged as Barding fielding an overage player.
4509	Klay Thompson injury update: Warriors star day-to-day after MRI on knee comes.
4510	Knock opponents off the track into cold outer space or take a detour that ends up working in your favor.
4511	Known as the most popular Christmas tree species in Europe, the Nordmann fir is renowned for its stately shape and rich green colour.
4512	“Know your girls is the motto!” she said.
4513	Kogi State Governor, Yahaya Bello, has expressed satisfaction with the Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC) conduct of the state governorship election.
4514	Kontiki Capital Management HK Ltd. grew its position in Liberty Media Formula One Series C by 68.8% in the first quarter.
4515	Kootenay Columbia’s Wayne Stetski says he is looking forward to debating Conservative candidate Rob Morrison, but only after the writ drops for October’s election and all candidates have been named.
4516	Kota Ibushi vs. Lance Archer (3): Ibushi refusing to back down to the big man from the jump, throwing hard strikes and making counters!
4517	Krane Funds Advisors LLC acquired a new stake in shares of The Coca-Cola during the 2nd quarter worth about $25,000.
4518	Kristen Leigh Painter covers the food industry for the Star Tribune.
4519	Kristin Davis, the co-owner of KC’s BBQ in Berkeley, said she prefers using a gas stove over an electric cooktop.
4520	Kriti will next be seen in Ashutosh Gowariker’s ambitious period drama, “Panipat”.
4521	Kukushkin, from California, was arrested last week, according to authorities.
4522	Kumar said changing the big stuff means doing what you can.
4523	KURTIS: In 2017, we ventured to San Francisco to talk to the greatest wide receiver of all time, Jerry Rice.
4524	"Kvaerner’s scope of work includes to prepare the quays, assist during load-in and perform the dismantling of the topsides."
4525	Kyona said it was a load of crap.
4526	Ladenburg Thalmann Financial Services Inc. increased its position in shares of ARBOR RLTY TR I/SH by 12.4% during the second quarter.
4527	Lady M Confections began hawking cakes to restaurants and stores in New York City in 2002.
4528	Lafferty Funeral Home in West Union, Ohio is serving the family.
4529	“Lagos would be in a mess if we fail to develop and make other cities liveable for our people,” I recall vividly Aregbesola’s constant admonitions as Governor.
4530	Lake Street Capital initiated coverage on Veracyte in a research report on Wednesday, July 31st.
4531	LALA World (CURRENCY:LALA) traded 19.4% higher against the dollar during the twenty-four hour period ending at 15:00 PM E.T. on April 28th.
4532	Lambasting the Congress party and its president for promising to amend AFSPA in its political manifesto, the Union Minister said, “Rahul Gandhi’s intentions for the country were very clear when he supported the ‘bharat tere tukde honge’ slogan.
4533	Lamb of God performed opened for Slayer on Thursday, May 2, the day three of their guitars were stolen at Ak-Chin Pavilion.
4534	La Mirada born and raised.
4535	Lana walks up from her surgery and after a couple seconds, she tells them, of course, she remembers her name and that he is Javi.
4536	Lanceley, who died in 2015 aged 77, was considered one of Australia's great contemporary artists and was the founding chairman of the National Art School.
4537	"(Landlords) are using a lot of different things to do business.
4538	Lanzini isn’t the type to make tackles (only three attempted so far) but works hard to win - and keep - the ball by attacking loose passes and slack control to steal the ball and drive West Ham up the pitch.
4539	Laredo Kid started the action by giving the Rascalz a flying crossbody.
4540	Large areas of Florida's reefs have been suffering from a mysterious condition that hit the region nearly five years ago.
4541	Last fall, WSSU rolled out a suite of student success technologies designed to improve graduation and retention rates for students.
4542	Last July, the pilot of an MiG-21 jet died after the fighter jet crashed in northern Himachal Pradesh state.
4543	"Lastly, Big Machine is trying to deflect and make this about money by saying she owes them but, an independent, professional auditor has determined that Big Machine owes Taylor $7.9 million dollars of unpaid royalties over several years."
4544	Lastly, Meng said the neighborhood is too poorly lit. He added that businesses close too early along the Anaheim Corridor because the streets are too dark.
4545	Last month, the beleaguered co-working companyrecalled 2,300 units due to elevated levels of formaldehyde, a substance linked to respiratory issues and, at high levels of exposure, to cancers.
4546	Last October, at a faculty meeting, Buell and Vice President for Institutional Diversity and Equity Leticia Haynes ’99 gave a presentation titled “Faculty hiring, retention and climate,” providing data on this issue.
4547	Last seen on the Mold to Saltney bus am Thurs. 23rd May.
4548	Last week, Arizona Board of Charter Schools director Charles Tack became the latest public official arrested for drinking and driving in Arizona.
4549	Last week I commented on the Prince George Spruce Kings decision to hire Nick Drazenovic as their Skills and Development Coach.
4550	Last week, Jodie, who plays Villanelle in the series, penned by Fleabag's Phoebe Waller-Bridge, scooped a BAFTA for Best Leading Actress.
4551	Last week Rosas spent several hours over three days discussing the position with Saunders.
4552	Last winter brought above-average snowfall to much of Colorado, Utah and Wyoming, so an abundance of snowmelt is rushing into the Colorado River, the Rio Grande and other waterways after a desperately dry 2018.
4553	Last year’s runner-up, the Austrian will hope to go one better this time around.
4554	Last year, the shooter at the tree of life synagogue posted on the site before killing 11 people.
4555	Last year was a step up.
4556	LAS VEGAS — There may have been questions around the Bruins offense following their first two wins of the season, but they answered them with flying colors on Tuesday.
4557	Later in a reply diss track aimed at Bucky, Christoph denied Bucky's accusation and publicly insulted Telia Urey, the sister of his ex-girlfiend Benita.
4558	Later, Parmelee was killed when his plane crashed in the state of Washington in 1912.
4559	Later that day, one of Finch’s family members reported her missing.
4560	Later the program can be rolled out to the homes for the aged as there is enough evidence that menstrual cycles resume after 70.
4561	"Later, the sergeant told the chaplain he had never seen anything like it in his life, but he sure wished his quadriplegic son was there."
4562	Later, when the packet was opened, it was found that they were bundles of blank papers wrapped up in Rs 500 notes on the front and rear sides.
4563	Latino voters know what’s at stake this election, and they are ready to vote Trump out in 2020,” said Mark-Viverito.
4564	Lattin said they left the cannonball where it was and returned the next day.
4565	Laughter and abundance are your key words.
4566	Laura insists that she really liked her face before she got hurt, explaining that she 'had a really nice nose' and 'didn't want to change anything.'
4567	Laura Tiglao, a Master of Science in Education (higher education student affairs).
4568	Laurene Powell Jobs, the widow of Apple CEO Steve Jobs (worth a mere $30 billion), founded the Emerson Collective, which advocates for policies relating to immigration and education reform.
4569	Lavorgna wouldn’t say how much Bloomberg plans to spend overall for his self-funded campaign.
4570	Law enforcement personnel taking part in an anti-terrorist exercise, at Admiralty MTR station in January 2018.
4571	Lawyer for the six of the accused persons Victor Kwodjoga Adawudu spoke after the court went on recess.
4572	Lawyers arguing amongst themselves is nothing new, but there is no place for such empty, ad hominem attacks within our learned profession.
4573	Lawyers for President Donald Trump’s administration say the commerce secretary has wide discretion to design the census questionnaire.
4574	LAX Tom Bradley International Terminal: Aug. 15 between 6 p.m. and 11:59 p.m.
4575	Leader of the Opposition Deb Frecklington and her team, 5 Km race, Bridge to Brisbane, Story Bridge, Kangaroo Point.
4576	Leaf + Root is a Covington-based business that creates handcrafted products in small batches out of organic healing ingredients.
4577	League of Legends Wild Rift will feature identical gameplay to its PC counterpart with tweaked controls and features to better accommodate the new platforms.
4578	Leake Furniture Makers have made several items for the White House and U.S. State Department, according to the release.
4579	Learn to levitate?
4580	Leclair’s wife managed to extinguish it.
4581	Leeds played well, created more than enough chances to win and were the more dynamic of the two promotion chasers.
4582	Lee pushed his army west and the Federals pursued in a parallel column south of the Rebels.
4583	Lee said that after a great deal of thought he had decided to leave the Conservatives amid concern over its direction since the Brexit vote.
4584	Left Parties' MPs protest against the Citizenship Amendment Bill, 2019 near the Gandhi statue in Parliament.
4585	Left set for nationwide stir against govt over economyhttps://indianexpress.
4586	Legendary high school football coach Herman Boone, who was famously portrayed by Denzel Washington in the movie “Remember the Titans,” has died.
4587	Legislators and the administration should find a way to get it in front of voters this November.
4588	Leipzig shot out of the blocks after the break and it was their turn to set the pace with Bayern Munich goalkeeper Neuer repeatedly coming to the rescue.
4589	Lenox Wealth Advisors LLC lifted its stake in Honeywell International by 453.8% in the second quarter.
4590	Lethbridge has seen the most visits, totalling more than 188,100 compared to around 46,700 in Edmonton and 68,400 in Calgary.
4591	Lethbridge Public Library’s mission is to be a welcoming, inclusive space that connects and strengthens community through equitable access to learning and leisure.
4592	Let him have his say.
4593	Let It Roll covered 6 1/2 furlongs in 1:16.10 under jockey Jansen Melancon, who was riding the homebred 3-year-old Roll Hennessy Roll filly for the first time.
4594	Letko Brosseau & Associates Inc. trimmed its holdings in GlaxoSmithKline plc (NYSE:GSK) by 5.7% in the second quarter, according to the company in its most recent Form 13F filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
4595	“Let me add this to our business partners that the commission wants value for money, wants protection of its pilgrims.
4596	Let’s also highlight the fact that this whistleblower took a big professional risk by taking his or her concerns to the inspector general’s office, but this person did the right thing anyway.
4597	“Let’s call this for what it is: an outrage,” the Defend Assange account after the news broke.
4598	Let's do all that we can to reverse that statistic and help close the wealth gap.
4599	Let's get this sweet girl a home.
4600	Let’s inform voters, and encourage students to become active, educated citizens both whilein undergrad and as they move beyond it.
4601	Let’s just raise a toast to Colonel Kapoor.
4602	Let's lay this win out with winners and losers from yesterday afternoon, shall we?
4603	Let’s look at this year’s Bruin team.
4604	Let's meet some of the lowest-performing white men in the world up close and personal.
4605	"Let's remove the light over the sink" 3 years ago turned into "lets rip everything out of the kitchen, cupboards, ceiling, and walls, and fully renovate it"
4606	Let's see if Meltzer's report rings true.
4607	Let’s shift our focus to my Draftkings player selections for week 20.
4608	“Let’s take our wheelchair users for example, let’s stop and think for a minute, what is it that is impairing their lives?
4609	Let take for example, the Sayawa ethnic group, where the former Speaker, House of Representatives, Yakubu Dogara comes from, also has similar problems with the Fulani oligarchy in Bauchi Emirate.
4610	Letter resides in Fortuna with her husband Ven, and their three children Madisyn 19, Kobe 17, and Matthew, 14. She enjoys spending time with her family, baking and cooking and cheering on her children at their sporting events.
4611	Letters to the editor: Prescott K9 Project; Help 'Stamp Out Hunger'
4612	Letts earlier expressed remorse over his parents being convicted for supporting terrorism by a British court after they sent £223 to a person in Lebanon in 2015 at their son's request, allegedly believing that it would help him return home.
4613	Let us pray for a ‘king’.
4614	Leverage technology to manage huge population for productive economy, Jumia boss…
4615	Lewis’s jury trial began Oct. 2 before U.S. District Court Judge Roy K. Altman.
4616	LEXINGTON, NC (AP) — A grand jury in North Carolina has indicted three people after police say a mother sold her 2-year-old child to a couple for a car.
4617	Liam Buckley hit the post with a header, but then Paul Campbell scored the free-kick with two or three minutes left to win it.
4618	Liam Knight and Fonua-Blake played together in the Manly lower grades and both have overcome their share of adversity to now square off as starting props in Friday's semi-final.
4619	Liberal Democrat leader Jo Swinson has said an "emergency government" may be necessary but argued that MPs from all parties would not be able to unite around Mr Corbyn as a temporary leader.
4620	Liberman served as defense minister under Netanyahu before resigning in November in protest of an unofficial ceasefire deal with the Gaza-ruling Hamas terror group to end a flare-up in violence.
4621	Liberty Sirius XM Group Series C has a 1 year low of $34.84 and a 1 year high of $48.56.
4622	Liberty Victoria senior vice president Jamie Gardiner said this has been a long time coming.
4623	“Life in the rural and urban areas is the same people are suffering.
4624	Life is not fair, get over it.
4625	Life is, of course, not as strong as death, but it is.
4626	Light snow expected across Clarksville-Montgomery County Wednesday night.
4627	“LightSUP Boards is far more than a fancy SUP Board.
4628	Light synchronization should be finished by 2020.
4629	Like A Boss has everything: Strong language, drug use, and coochie cakes.
4630	Like all our countrymen, I’m sad tonight to see this part of us burn.”
4631	Like commuters from Fife, the 50 or so workmen in orange suits on it every night are aliens desperate to get back to their own Kingdom.
4632	Like everyone who grew up watching him, we miss Steve.
4633	Like everything else we sample, its simplicity displays refinement and expertise in the kitchen staff.
4634	Like his father, monogamy is not his strong suite.
4635	Like Kerr and Oathout, students like Maria Taliani, a senior environmental science major, see the good that GU+ could bring.
4636	Likely, Prado was not fully conscious when the alleged assault occurred.
4637	Like many 14-year-olds, Connor Isaacs spent a lot of time drawing and playing games on his Xbox.
4638	Like Mehnaaz, there are many others in Lucknow who have relatives in Kashmir and are worried about their well-being.
4639	Like Morris, she believes the inquiry is driven by Democrats who remain unable to accept the results of the 2016 general election.
4640	Like Ross’ night in Vegas, this is a game the Knights will want to forget about.
4641	Like Vikram, the ISRO too has gone into a silent mode, avoiding the media except for a few brief comments by some officials to select journalists.
4642	Lila Holzman, energy program manager for environmental advocacy group As You Sow, said the proposed changes represent a weakening of regulations and, therefore, rejected EPA’s amendments.
4643	Lillpopp believes if anyone has the desire to do something, then they have the right attitude and probably can do it,” said Shelby Schumacher, the color guard coach.
4644	Lil Skies releases his Cole Bennett-directed video for the single “Welcome to the Rodeo.”
4645	Lindbrook Capital LLC bought a new stake in Edwards Lifesciences in the 4th quarter valued at about $27,000.
4646	Lindbrook Capital LLC bought a new stake in shares of Freeport-McMoRan during the fourth quarter valued at approximately $28,000.
4647	Lindsay Judge, Senior Economic Analyst at the Resolution Foundation, explained that the UK has plenty of rules to govern its labour market, but the laws were no use unless they are “properly enforced”.
4648	Liquidity crunch tremendously affected the GDP growth and employment in the past nine months.
4649	Lisa Lawler, 61, thought her husband’s affair was the final nail in the coffin for ending her 26-year marriage.
4650	Lisk has a market cap of $131.06 million and approximately $2.06 million worth of Lisk was traded on exchanges in the last day.
4651	Listening (from left) are President, Small Business Association of Jamaica (SBAJ), Hugh Johnson; and Conference Chairperson, Dr. Blossom O’Meally-Nelson.
4652	Listening to music, not performing it, brought me out of my situation.
4653	Litecoin (LTC) traded up 2.5% against the dollar and now trades at $31.90 or 0.00914445 BTC.
4654	Little Funny Bunny just got run down late last start but finished in front of Free Verse, who probably would’ve beaten her if she didn’t lose momentum when veering across runners.
4655	Liverpool vs Tottenham, Premier League: What time is kick-off, what TV channel is it on and what is our prediction?
4656	Ljungberg has said he is working on a game-by-game basis but the way the players responded suggests he can at least steady the ship.
4657	LKG plays out like a spoof film and unfortunately, the story doesn’t rise above spoofing the cliched political characters and situations.
4658	LNX Protocol (CURRENCY:LNX) traded 0.1% lower against the U.S. dollar during the one day period ending at 17:00 PM ET on October 9th.
4659	Local organizer Ip Pan, who is also a game developer, said that he hoped the challenge would serve as a platform to facilitate the growth of Macau’s game development industry.
4660	Locals have a chance to hear both this weekend, as Seattle’s Early Music Guild presents a concert and talk by French-Canadian shanty ensemble (which became popular, strangely, thanks to a song they recorded for the video game ).
4661	Locked and trailed Gordon’s tight curl into the lane when said misdirection failed.
4662	Locke is extremely critical of the transition from RCMP to a municipal police force, mayor Doug McCallum’s most high-profile project.
4663	“Lock-up” is an important concept that can make you a lot of money if you understand it… and cost you a lot of money if you don’t.
4664	Logandan pleaded guilty to possessing the tainted property and stealing by a clerk or servant.
4665	Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla today indicated that he would call BJP member Pragya Thakur, who is facing opposition fire for her remarks on Nathuram Godse, to the House after the Question Hour.
4666	LONDON (AP) — British and European Union negotiators plan to work through the weekend to see if they can agree a Brexit deal in time for next week’s summit of EU leaders.
4667	LONDON: Bomb disposal officers carried out a controlled explosion on a suspicious package at Manchester Airport on Monday, police said, adding a man had been detained by officers at the scene.
4668	London controlled the majority of the play in the first period and emerged with a 3-0 lead on goals by Nathan Dunkley, Jonathan Gruden and Alec Regula.
4669	LONDON — David Cameron, the British prime minister who called the Brexit referendum, says in a new memoir that Boris Johnson, Britain’s leader now, embraced withdrawing from the European Union only when he sensed it would be politically advantageous.
4670	Longer longitudinal studies are necessary to fully understand this last phase.
4671	Long's team is currently competing in the postseason, and will next be in action on Thursday night.
4672	Long-term complications could include severe arthritis.
4673	LOOD de Jager was afforded the opportunity to play for the Springboks at the 2019 IRB Rugby World Cup (RWC), which will commence on September 21 in Japan.
4674	“Look at the trend lines.
4675	Look at what happened this week.
4676	Look beyond the determinedly negative narrative and you will see that Saudi Aramco is the world’s largest state oil company, with export infrastructure and refining capability to match.
4677	Looking at the % changes and % high/low levels, the major US stock are all closing at/near the highs for the day.
4678	Looking more widely, anyone who tells you Apple itself is in danger is wrong.
4679	Look, John Harbaugh is a fantastic coach.
4680	Look my name up on the internet and you can follow the damage."
4681	Look, people want to tell stories, people want to sell newspapers.
4682	Looks like is getting a wide release in the UK, at least.) Is it that WMDs continue to remain unfound in Iraq, and that there continues to be no justification for the still-not-ended post-9/11 war in the Middle East, almost 20 years later?
4683	Loop Capital initiated coverage on Brinker International in a research note on Wednesday, October 24th.
4684	Lopez then re-shared his post, describing it as “amazing.”
4685	Lord help the soul who decides to call out on his compulsive golf habit, particularly if the soul happens to be a foreign critic of the president that Trump was golfing while supposedly monitoring a hurricane.
4686	Lorenzo Walther scored on a one yard run for the Vikings in the fourth quarter.
4687	LOS ANGELES (AP) — “The Morning Show” started life as a behind-the-scenes peek at a slice of network TV as familiar and routine as a wake-up cup of coffee.
4688	LOS ANGELES (KABC) -- Nineteen-year-old Ana Lua Martel has grown up in the middle of heated immigration debate.
4689	LOS ANGELES (LALATE) – Who won Dancing with the Stars 2018 results tonight?
4690	Los Angeles was “shut out of three stars,” The Los Angeles Times reported, citing n/naka and Vespertine as deserving of the highest rating.
4691	Lots of questions and berating what we’ve done in the past.
4692	Love watching you play Greg, but walk away while you can still walk.
4693	Love you all forever.
4694	Low-dose naltrexone has lurked for years on the fringes of medicine, but its zealous advocates worry that it may be stuck there.
4695	LOWELL, Mass. -- The Greylock Thunder 16-and-under travel softball team Saturday went 1-2, finishing its day with a 3-2 win over the East Coast Firecrackers at the All-American Tournament.
4696	Lows early Thursday will be mostly between 25 and 32.
4697	LSU’s preseason all-conference honors include five players on defense, three on offense and one on special teams.
4698	Lt. Pete Pagano, a spokesman for the U.S. Navy's 5th Fleet overseeing the Mideast, said authorities there were "aware of reports of this incident," but declined to comment further.
4699	Lt. Tracy will serve as an Assistant Corps Officer.
4700	Luckily, Aro's desire to stay alive kept this from ever happening and Carlisle's doom was prevented.
4701	Luckily, I’ve capitalized the past two.
4702	Lulu Menziwa, a school teacher who has been trending for her looks and dress code, has asked to be left alone.
4703	LUMBERTON — The Robeson County Disaster Recovery Coalition will be selling barbecue meals Friday to raise money to fund its efforts to help victims of hurricanes Matthew and Florence.
4704	Lungu, Kapata, Chitotela, Kampyongo can all afford this, using tax payers money as usual.
4705	Lyft has said it plans to launch in Vancouver before the end of the year, and Uber announced it will also be applying to the Passenger Transportation Board and hopes to be in operation by the busy holiday season.
4706	Lynx controlling the pace whilst Saltires tightened at the back and countered.
4707	Mac always had an ear to lend and a belly to scratch.
4708	MacGillivray is vying for a starting spot along with Marshall and Sunderland’s Jon McLaughlin after being given his maiden international call-up.
4709	Mackowiak discussed how this debate could have major repercussions not only on the front-runners, but also on the Texans running.
4710	MACON, Georgia (41NBC/WMGT) – Macon Transit Authority is able to continue operating after commissioners paid MTA every dime they owed MTA.
4711	MacPherson started recording on her cell phone.
4712	Macquarie Group Ltd. lifted its stake in shares of Prestige Consumer Healthcare by 7.8% during the second quarter.
4713	Macy’s Inc has a 12 month low of $23.95 and a 12 month high of $41.99.
4714	Madaki who has few days to spend in office as speaker, said the gesture was aimed at empowering the people to become self-sufficient, by boosting their personal income and that of the state in general.
4715	Made from a thick, durable ripstop material, and accented with leather handles and a reinforced leather floor that gives you a flat base for packing, feels like the type of bag that could last you for decades.
4716	Mahadeo was employed at a mining camp that is owned by a Parika businessman.
4717	Maharashtra’s sugarcane crushing is all set to extend by at least a fortnight as mills complain of acute shortage of harvesting labourers.
4718	Maharashtra State Road Development Corporation (MSRDC) has given the Versova-Bandra Sea Link project contract to Anil Ambani's Reliance Infrastructure.
4719	Mahatma Gandhi rightly called the entire system rotten.
4720	Mahatma Gandhi was often an invitee rather than being a member.
4721	Mahershala Ali backstage at the 25th Screen Actors Guild Awards at the Los Angeles Shrine Auditorium and Expo Hall on Sunday, Jan.
4722	Mahinda Rajapaksa responded saying that they acted with an understanding of the general public in North and Eastern areas.
4723	Main image: William Blake’s Ancient of Days is projected on to the dome of St Paul’s Cathedral in London.
4724	Make a list of your top 10. This is what you aspire to.
4725	Make it Christmas, but Black with these Clarence Claus socks that will never go out of style over the years.
4726	“Makes the rounds seriously dangerous, particularly that tight corner from the square going towards the bank and Dominos.”
4727	Make sure it’s a bit off the beaten path to get the extra exercise, and truly enjoy the extra hour of sunshine while taking in a beautiful view with a loved one.
4728	Make sure the caliber of content may be as great because it truly is presumed for our general requests.
4729	Making a will is the only way to be certain that your money goes to those you want to have it.
4730	Malayalam film producer Joby Geroge has denied making death threats to actor Shane Nigam.
4731	Malaysians were rightly upset that in order to empower his party, he has resorted to courting and recruiting Umno MPs to join his party, Bersatu.
4732	Malema was in the country two weeks ago to pay his condolences following Mugabe's death early last month.
4733	Malik Hancock took a pitch right 28 yards to set up Anderson’s 1-yard run to close the gap to eight midway through the final quarter.
4734	Malmgren said the officer's lookout for him.
4735	Mama starts sobbing again.
4736	Manafort later acknowledged guilt in all the bank-related charges as part of a deal with the special counsel’s office.
4737	Manchester City took another big step towards banking back-to-back English Premier League titles as they scrapped to a 1-0 win at Burnley on Sunday.
4738	Manchester has been celebrating Pride since 1985 and the city's gay village is open to everyone who wants to celebrate.
4739	Mancini, who succeeded Ventura in May 2018, believes that his players can use the memory of that World Cup disappointment to help them in their bid to book a place at next year's cross-continental European Championship finals.
4740	Mandelbaum, 62, helped orchestrate the reunion of the in time to celebrate the 25th anniversary of its seminal debut album, Enter the Wu-Tang (36 Chambers), with a 13-stop tour and a Showtime docuseries.
4741	Mandryk: Sask. politics moving from left to right is the movement.
4742	Manilow sang more than 30 songs, some in a medley, because if he sang all his hits at full length, the show would end at four in the morning.
4743	Manuela Tobias is a journalist at The Fresno Bee.
4744	Many academics in the recent past (including academics at ) have fallen victim to the Home Office’s haphazard, arbitrary and unreasonable decision-making.
4745	Many actresses get hair highlights and plastic surgeries with the core agenda of changing traditional facial and bodily features.
4746	Many are forced to be sex slaves, and reports found that IS even uses social media sites such as Facebook to sell Yazidi women as sex slaves.
4747	Many businesses in the online ecosystem may maintain personal information that does not identify a consumer on its own, for example, IP addresses, mobile advertising identifiers, cookie IDs, and other online identifiers.
4748	Many children are heading through the area on their way to school and are seeing this crime scene.
4749	Many common pollutants do not cause water to smell, taste, or look funny, so you can’t rely on your senses to determine safety.
4750	Many fans believe that Rey’s affinity towards the force and tragic backstory will turn her into the main villain of this run of the series.
4751	"Many filmmakers have been bugging me for years to put films online, and be like an online portal for films and getting them out and distribute it," he said.
4752	Many IS supporters believe they will try again.
4753	Many live in about 35 camps scattered throughout the province, in territory that is virtually inaccessible due to insecurity.
4754	Many members feel the club offers a space to freely discuss their thoughts on politics and social issues without fear.
4755	Many nights, it is the second most-watched cable network, behind only Fox News Channel, whose lineup of conservative hosts appeals to the president’s supporters.
4756	Many nursing homes across the province have been actively working towards the goals that the health authority have set out four years ago,” Michele Lowe, managing director of the Nursing Homes of Nova Scotia Association, said.
4757	Many of more than 30,000 houses Typhoon Faxai destroyed or damaged in Chiba last month have yet to be repaired.
4758	Many of the battles against Yoshikage Kira are shown in two-parter sequences, including this episode.
4759	Many of the firefighters have been on the line for days, and some have worked as many as 36 hours at a stretch with no rest.
4760	Many of those states (not just Ukraine and Georgia, but also Sweden and Finland) would not agree to be consigned to such a zone.
4761	Many of us are being consigned to becoming nannies or abandoned to fate.
4762	Many of us will have anecdotal evidence to support this: friends who voted No in the referendum who, even if as yet unconvinced of the merits of independence, are at least now willing to consider the prospect.
4763	Many pilots in the US qualified to fly the earlier version of the 737, on which the Max is based, only received training amounting to “an iPad lesson for an hour,” which did not cover the anti-stall system.
4764	Many residents are also moving out of the area as a result of the situation.
4765	Many Saudis have been flocking to attend performances held as part of the `Riyadh Season’ entertainment festival, part of a push to open up the conservative kingdom for tourists and non-oil investments.
4766	Many socialists today view the system with rose-colored glasses, yet are often unaware of the original intentions of socialism.
4767	Many suggested it should have complete autonomy without any affiliation to avoid duplication.
4768	Many wireless devices today operate solely in the 2.4 GHz band, such as fitness watches, wearables, mesh links, and certain cell phone radios.
4769	Many workers left the Capital Hill using the northern gate as the main gate was surrounded by the MCP supporters.
4770	Marathon Petroleum’s payout ratio is currently 31.27%.
4771	Marches have already played a part in getting us as far as we are.
4772	Marco Stiepermann adds a second in the 25th minute.
4773	MARGARET BRENNAN: David, I want to start off with this storm.
4774	Mariah Carey is going to be bigger than Michael Jackson.”
4775	Maria Sharapova Celebrates Sugarpova's Hudson Group Agreement in NYC!
4776	Marjorie Cohn is a former president of the National Lawyers Guild and a professor at Thomas Jefferson School of Law, where she teaches criminal law and procedure, evidence, and international human rights law.
4777	Mark Birchall, who worked with Simon Rogan at, is a gifted chef.
4778	MarketAxess Holdings Inc. has a 52 week low of $172.09 and a 52 week high of $373.98.
4779	Marketers should thus aim to impress their customers by being active on chat, email and other platforms.
4780	Mark Pilgrim, chair of the magistrates' bench, sentenced Philp to a fine of £120, a victim surcharge of £30 and court costs of £620, for a total of £770 to be paid in instalments of £10 per week.
4781	Mark Saunders will now serve another year as Chief of the Toronto Police Service.
4782	Mark Sinyor is a psychiatrist at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre in Toronto.
4783	Maroc Telecom is a telecommunications operator (mobile, fixed and Internet) in Morocco.
4784	Marriage Unit Supervisor of the Registrar General’s Department, Normalyn Bell.
4785	Marrying these registers is the next step we need to take to decisively boost their cross-usage.
4786	MARSHALL -- Left for dead on Halloween night, the Adrian Dragons overcame an 0-2 game deficit and two match points Thursday night to beat Tracy-Milroy-Balaton for the South Section 3A volleyball championship.
4787	Martial and Rashford both went on to 10 league goals for the season with their strikes in the Watford win.
4788	Martin Scorsese's The Irishman has won the love of critics.
4789	Master Sgt. Jason Knepper, an Air Force Security Forces Center flight chief, joined the CSW cadre in January as a security forces functional lead.
4790	Masvingo Province Police spokesperson Assistant Inspector Kudakwashe Dhewa confirmed the matter and urged the public to conduct baptizing activities at safe places and in the presence of life savers.
4791	Matt sent fans wild when he revealed she's heading out of the country soon.
4792	Matured guys, please stop criticizing him.
4793	Maula is requesting the zoning change because apartments are not permitted in manufacturing districts.
4794	Maura has been splitting her time between her home in Ireland and the UK, as she made her debut as an Agony Aunt on This Morning last week.
4795	Maxim Group set a $195.00 target price on Cracker Barrel Old Country Store and gave the stock a “buy” rating in a report on Sunday, September 15th.
4796	Max Mitchell, 38, of Belmont, was summoned for speeding and failure to produce insurance by Officer Samuel Butler.
4797	Max Verstappen won a thrilling Brazilian Formula One Grand Prix for Red Bull on Sunday after the Ferraris collided and Mercedes' six-times world champion Lewis Hamilton was demoted from third to seventh.
4798	May as well put up a sign on your candy that says "free van."
4799	Maybe I could've waited a few weeks until these wacky numbers settled to examine the more questionable names, but getting ahead of the rush always is the better choice.
4800	Maybe it’s the guilt obese people like me feel.
4801	Maybe that’s O.K. I think you have more of a problem with that than I do.
4802	Maybe the person whose dog is crapping in front of my house is just a tourist on a really long stay?
4803	"Maybe they'll finally listen to us and he'll finally be stopped," she said.
4804	Maybe your state court hasn’t ruled on an issue, but you can find persuasive authority from another jurisdiction?
4805	Maybe you want to start an apocalyptic church for believers to learn to change their murderous ways.
4806	May God reachily bless you Tasila for such a generous heart you are born with.
4807	May has held out the prospect of a last-minute concession from the EU to woo Brexiters, but it is unclear at the time of writing what she will deliver.
4808	Mayoral candidate Jonathan Bingle was not only willing to have a one-on-one interview with the he reached out and pestered us to make it happen.
4809	Mayor K Gurunathan says it’s great to see these applications successfully progress through the funding process.
4810	Mayor Muriel Bowser and DC Council Chair Phil Mendelson, arrive for a House hearing titled H.R. 51: Making DC the 51st State.
4811	May plans next move in Brexit fight as chances…
4812	May's departure will deepen the Brexit crisis as a new leader is likely to want a more decisive split, raising the chances of a confrontation with the European Union and a potentially unpredictable snap parliamentary election.
4813	MBABANE – It will now big a bigger mountain for Sihlangu to climb against Angola.
4814	Mbalula also stressed that the task team was not working on a scheme to implement e-tolls in terms of the current scheme.
4815	McCoy was identified as the person who robbed the bank and investigators lodged an arrest warrant for robbery and grand larceny, both in the third degree.
4816	McCulloch’s own style is the endearingly nerdy presentation of an educator.
4817	MCC, which has been in force since the announcement of Lok Sabha on March 10, ensures a level-playing field for all political parties and candidates fighting elections.
4818	McDarby was accused of statutory rape, rape, disposing of a baby’s body, physically abusing Mary and isolating her and her children.
4819	McGlynn remembers her walking into his studio 15 years ago while he was painting a piece that featured a figure with a giant empty thought bubble that he was about to fill with words.
4820	McTominay does superbly to take three players with him and win a corner.
4821	Meals, transportation and uniforms will be provided.
4822	Me and my friends would down these in the locker room and go play indoor volleyball at our local park.
4823	Meanwhile, at the post-production stage, Rogers Group of Funds combined with Telefilm to cover up to $75,000 of costs per project.
4824	Meanwhile, Brent crude oil futures that trade on the Intercontinental Exchange has traded in a band between $55 and $65 per barrel.
4825	Meanwhile, Commons Speaker John Bercow announced a list of seven amendments that will be debated and move forward for a vote on Tuesday evening.
4826	Meanwhile, Floridians are suffering.
4827	Meanwhile, incessant rain continued throughout the day on Sunday inundating the low-lying areas in the city.
4828	Meanwhile, Jeremy Corbyn will use a speech on Monday to say Labour is doing "everything necessary to pull our country back from the brink".
4829	Meanwhile, Lambie gives us the spectacle of voting for something while saying she can't tell us why.
4830	Meanwhile, let's upgrade winter maintenance on paths and sidewalks, and connect paths together to avoid cyclists sharing the road with cars, buses and trucks.
4831	Meanwhile, many of those countries have already forged ahead in the slimmed-down TPP and could open up more regional trade opportunities with RCEP.
4832	Meanwhile most of their map was blank.
4833	Meanwhile, President Mnangagwa leaves Uganda for France to attend the Sixth Replenishment Conference of the Global Fund to Fight AIDs, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
4834	Meanwhile, Robert, 76, went for a smarter look in grey trousers, a dark green shirt and a striped scarf.
4835	Meanwhile, Ryan Dzingel, Chris Tierney and Zack Smith have each chipped in up front with some offence to help complement what the star scorers like Matt Duchene and Brady Tkachuk have brought to the table.
4836	Meanwhile, Tasha has opened her new daycare center and Quinton a.k.a Q definitely wants ALL that she has to offer…
4837	Meanwhile, the Liberian leader is today also expected to dedicate the ministerial complex funded and built by China.
4838	Meanwhile, the offer of sugar by millers to farmers has not received the expected response.
4839	Meanwhile, the United Nations says around two-thirds of women who marry will experience violence at the hands of their partners, with half reporting assaults in the last year.
4840	Meanwhile, Transpo plans to add markings on some station platforms to suggest where customers should stand to avoid conflicts with people getting off trains.
4841	Meanwhile, unknown gunmen suspected to be bandits, on Monday, November 2 attacked Kukoki community in Kagara local government area of Niger state.
4842	Meanwhile voter numbers in Alice Springs have increased sharply since the 2016 Territory election.
4843	Meanwhile, Zanaco continue to enjoy a three point lead at the summit of Pool A on 10 points while Zesco stay second on 7 points with a match in hand.
4844	Meat, dairy and any liquid besides water is on the no-no list.
4845	Media coverage serves only to encourage copycats.
4846	Media reports say the government is working on a relief package for very small borrowers, essentially small farmers, businesspeople, traders or artisans.
4847	Medical laboratory experts maintain that the current high prevalence of the Sickle Cell Disease (SCD) amidst the overwhelming awareness on the disease was because many people are still ignorant.
4848	Meditation allowed them to know themselves better, helping them feel more relaxed and peaceful.
4849	Medvedev, the world number four, is set to face Alexander Zverev in tomorrow's final after the German overcame Matteo Berrettini of Italy at the Association of Tennis Professionals Masters 1000 tournament at the Qizhong Forest Sports City Arena.
4850	Meeder Asset Management Inc. now owns 3,672 shares of the specialty pharmaceutical company’s stock worth $62,000 after purchasing an additional 3,179 shares during the period.
4851	MEEKER I The Meeker Chamber of Commerce would like to recognize its December members of the month.
4852	Meet the 14 candidates vying to become 2019’s Aurora, Queen of Snows – Twin Cities Meet the 14 candidates vying to become 2019’s…
4853	Megacles assured Cylon that he would receive a fair and just trial and his life would be spared if he left the refuge of the temple.
4854	Megan Brunt, now 20, works at an emergency call-handling centre in Portishead in the south of England.
4855	Meisner, who represents some talent working for Sinclair, noted that weather is the top reason viewers tune in to television news, and the media have a responsibility not to frighten them needlessly with forecasts.
4856	Melburnians were a bit jaded about Lygon Street, Mr Dimattina believed, and high rents needed to drop to reflect its change in fortunes.
4857	Mellin stressed that queer people and people of color, especially queer women of color, have often done the labor to catalyze institutional change, often without administrative support.
4858	Members of Congress have jokingly compared the flurry of seemingly random legislative demands, like raising the tobacco purchase age to 21, to adding a couple of extra ornaments on the Christmas tree.
4859	Members of the Oak Bluffs finance committee asked the consultants whether their process for amending the agreement would take into account a town’s “ability to pay” and whether their method would use the equalized valuation formula.
4860	Memorials may be made to the St. Mark Lutheran Church General Fund or Flower Fund.
4861	“Memphis River Parks Partnership reps have said several times 'Memphis in May officials have been involved the entire time,’” reads Adams’ petition.
4862	Memphis’s defense is fine and look forward to seeing the Express making a run at the Orlando Apollos.
4863	Menendez was unimpressed, saying Monday that Amazon's response failed to show that Choice listings meet quality or safety standards.
4864	Mercedes Corby, the sister of convicted drug smuggler Schapelle Corby, was rumoured to be “in talks” with producers on Married At First Sight.
4865	Mercedes had dominated Friday practice but felt that Ferrari were holding something in reserve then, and so it proved.
4866	Mercer International had a net margin of 9.82% and a return on equity of 26.76%.
4867	“Merrie England” is tuneful and jolly as well as stuffed with a large cast of 16 named characters and a full chorus.
4868	Merritt said that's likely what Guyger and her attorneys will say at trial in an attempt to justify her actions.
4869	Mesmerized by the stones, Garnett offers to buy them for enough money to clear Ratner’s gambling debts.
4870	Metacritic only tracks the top critics, so the important RT score is really the Top Critics score which is currently 94%.
4871	Me: This one looks like a player.
4872	Meth, marijuana, two weapons, and $8,840 were taken as evidence.
4873	Methodist Central Hall is also central London’s largest conference and events venue.
4874	Metro Bank recently raised a muchneeded £300 million from a bond that pays an extraordinary 9.5%.
4875	MEXICO CITY — Mexico’s Senate voted Thursday to approve the modifications negotiated this week to the U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement, known as the USMCA.
4876	Mexico’s president diverted resources away from priorities like curbing violence to appease Mr. Trumphttps://indianexpress.
4877	MHS jumped all over Eastern (D.C.) early, scoring 35 first-quarter points and never looking back in a 76-6 rout of the Ramblers.
4878	MIAMI – A crude video meme depicting President Donald Trump gunning down political foes and media organizations inside a church was shown last weekend during a far-right conference held at the president’s Doral resort.
4879	Michael Douglas says America's two-party system not working: 'Collaboration is vilified'
4880	Michael Jarjura was re-elected mayor of Waterbury as a write-in 2005, an even more difficult task when Connecticut still used voting machines, not paper ballots.
4881	Michael Macgeorge who has died in Melbourne at the age of 93 joined in 1942 and spent 50 years on the newspaper.
4882	Micheaux Film Festival 2018 attendees pose for photo ops.
4883	Michigan linebacker Devin Bush tore up Michigan State’s midfield logo with his cleats before the game.
4884	Micro-imaging runner-up, Completely Stitched Up by Anne Weston ‘This is a scanning electron micrograph of surgical thread used to stitch a head wound.
4885	Microsoft can’t afford to make this mistake a second time, and it needs to announce a reasonable price well ahead of the console’s launch in order to avoid another embarrassing situation.
4886	Microsoft’s announcement in 2016 that it was making a preview available of VMware virtualization on Azure didn’t sit well with VMware.
4887	Migrants waiting have said they have experienced hardship while on the Mexican side of the border; a man waiting in Tijuana told Vox in February that his friend had been robbed and harassed by police after being returned to Mexico.
4888	Mike Brown, spokesman for the Archdiocese of San Francisco, told the Journal Walsh is a “retired, out-of-ministry priest of the Archdiocese of San Francisco.”
4889	MILAN – The chairman of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles indicated Thursday that the merger with French carmaker PSA Peugeot will not be affected by a General Motors lawsuit.
4890	Miles drew the original sketches that illustrator and graphic designer Boris Cvekic used to create the final images in the book.
4891	Miley Cyrus Gets Kaitlynn Carter’s Support Backstage At The MTV VMAs!
4892	Military veterans — many of whom have served in Iraq, Afghanistan and other theaters of war — are now subject to deportation if they happen not to be American citizens.
4893	Millican is scheduled to be sentenced in January and faces between 15 and 30 years in prison.
4894	MILLINGTON, Tenn. (NNS) – Summer is coming to an end, but the weather in many locations remains ideal for motorcycle riding.
4895	Mills admitted that he was frustrated.
4896	Mills reacted when President Trump retweeted the video to his massive online following.
4897	Mina, who admitted his mistake and apologised, had the advert taken down once he realised he had breached FA rules.
4898	Minnesota shooting: At least three people were injured in a shooting outside the State Fair late Monday, the authorities said.
4899	Miss Coates said.
4900	Miss Connor said that Begum maintained her position of innocence over the offence, but added it arose from a “momentary, catastrophic loss of control”.
4901	Miss Melly said: ‘The defendants expected the tablets to kill the children overnight.’
4902	Miss World 2019 Toni-Ann Singh of Jamaica is congratulated by other contestants after winning the award during the 69th annual Miss World competition at the Excel centre in London, England, yesterday.
4903	Mitchell scored on a 62-yard run on the first play of the game.
4904	Mizuho raised Xilinx from a “neutral” rating to a “buy” rating and set a $100.00 price target on the stock in a research note on Thursday, January 17th.
4905	Mk V and Mk IV, US Army tank commanders preferred the 75mm Sherman to the 76mm variants, since the 75mm had a better high explosive round for its primary role: infantry support.
4906	MLS Cup MVP Victor Rodriguez, Roman Torres among Sounders unprotected for expansion draftSounders winger Victor Rodriguez and defender Roman Torres headlined the clubâ€™s list of unprotected players for the MLS expansion draft next week.
4907	Mobile phones are no executive toy, but the must-have of every granny I know, complete with screensavers of the grandkids to show off to any passing stranger.
4908	Mobile Police Officer Sean Tuder was killed in the line of duty on Jan.
4909	Moffit was the only featured speaker who isn't in law enforcement, and she knows more about addiction than she cares to.
4910	’m often asked about the best time to visit South Africa, but the answer depends on exactly where you’re heading and what you intend to do.
4911	Mogadishu, March 2 (IANS) The US military on Friday said it conducted an airstrike in central Somalia on Thursday, killing 26 Al-Shabaab terrorists.
4912	Mogadishu’s mayor Omar Mohamud Mohamed told a press conference that the exact number of dead was not yet known, but that around 90 people were wounded.
4913	Mohammad bin Salman said a war would be catastrophic for global growth.
4914	Mohammad Shahzad was bowled by Mitchell Starc in the opening over of the match and Hazratullah Zazai quickly followed, caught behind by wicket-keeper Alex Carey off Pat Cummins.
4915	Moisture and instability in the lower atmosphere will produce a few showery periods over the Eastern Caribbean islands today.
4916	Moley told the OIG that he only heard Stull make such remarks in reference to former political appointees who she believed were converted to career employees in the department.
4917	Monitor social media, news and radio for information, and call 907-262-INFO (4636) for updates.
4918	Monsters & Critics had the opportunity to talk to them earlier this year and then again in the present.
4919	Montreal, which already had clinched its first playoff berth since 2014, will finish second in the East Division and will host a semifinal game on Nov. 10. While the Argos won the Grey Cup in 2017, they’ve fallen on hard times since.
4920	Moody's Amazon Analyst Charlie O'Shea said Amazon profits were hit by "margin compression in North America due to the investments in next-day Prime delivery."
4921	Moose Lake Police and Carlton County Sheriff squads were still parked outside the home blocked off by crime scene tape around 10 p.m. Monday.
4922	Morales defeated Ivan Koloff for the WWE title in 1971, and kept it for 1,027 days before losing to Stan Stasiak.
4923	More details on Labour sacking its candidate in Falkirk over allegations she made a series of antisemitic social media posts.
4924	More importantly, burying him shows a respect to the gods.
4925	More investment is needed in the preparations and supplies necessary for voters to be able to continue to cast ballots should something go wrong because of hacking or another malfunction.
4926	Moreno emphasized the importance of working with administration to bring about university-wide changes.
4927	Moreno, who still claims to be a socialist, has received unexpected support from the right and the army over the unrest.
4928	More on the investigation on pic.
4929	Moreover, as the hookup culture continues to permeate college campuses and leftist feminists fight to blur sex differences and attack the family, women’s happiness is bound to continue its downward trend.
4930	Moreover, for a young pair that had never played a big final on the pro circuit, this was confidence oozing through their assured strides on court.
4931	Moreover, leafy vegetables at this time are infested with a lot of insects and germs.
4932	Moreover, like other cities, Baltimore has suffered crippling attacks before, and was warned about vulnerabilities.
4933	Moreover, there is growing understanding of the underlying political, economic and cultural causes propping up this status quo, and more of the long-term human health implications are coming to light, as well.
4934	Moreover, we can expect further provocations, perhaps serious ones, in the near future.
4935	More than 200 entries were whittled down to a shortlist of 12 albums.
4936	More than 30 years after she was among the lucky few to win a Disneyland pass as part of a 30th anniversary giveaway at the theme park, Tamia Richardson returned to claim her prize -- a day of magic with her two teen daughters.
4937	“More than 4,000 shoppers a week, that’s 17,000 a month, pick up their while shopping at local King Soopers and City Market Stores,” Publisher Amy Sweet says.
4938	More than 430 Nigels gathered in a pub in yesterday for a party designed to "celebrate Nigelness" amid fears the name will die out.
4939	More than 500 people turned out for the stamp ceremony.
4940	More than 60 groups will be singing at 25 venues around town across the weekend.
4941	More than 800 New Jersey middle school students from 32 schools will attend Clean Ocean Action's two-day Seaside Summit on May 15 and 16 at Gateway National Recreation Area in Sandy Hook.
4942	More than a music book, it has become an instant classic of cultural history, with pertinent things to say about the kind of country we live in. It may have reawakened the old smugness in non-Queenslanders, but this would be misplaced.
4943	More than that, the underlying principle was if you’re a minority in a predominantly white society, you have to laugh.
4944	More types of cancer could potentially be destroyed by patients’ own immune cells, thanks to new research by Cardiff University.
4945	More Victorians are seeking help from emergency departments for opioid-related illness.
4946	Morgan Stanley lowered their price target on First Horizon National from $19.00 to $18.00 and set an “equal weight” rating on the stock in a research report on Tuesday, December 11th.
4947	Morgan Stanley now owns 3,121,292 shares of the exchange traded fund’s stock worth $145,361,000 after acquiring an additional 160,045 shares during the last quarter.
4948	Morgan Stanley now owns 3,400,893 shares of the oil and gas producer’s stock valued at $131,579,000 after purchasing an additional 637,520 shares during the period.
4949	Morningstar, Inc. (NASDAQ:MORN) insider Joseph D. Mansueto sold 16,547 shares of the company’s stock in a transaction on Tuesday, February 19th.
4950	Morpheus Labs (CURRENCY:MITX) traded down 9.9% against the US dollar during the 1-day period ending at 0:00 AM E.T. on April 3rd.
4951	Morrison moved to Las Vegas from the Northeast three years ago to spend his golden years in the city’s sunny, warm climate.
4952	Morrissey vowed not to buy Canadian products or perform in the country back in 2006 as a “protest against the barbaric slaughter of baby seals.”
4953	“Moses delivered Israelites from the hands of Egyptians, but Joshua was placed to take the people of Israel to the Promised Land.
4954	Most (71 percent) who start behind are still behind in fifth grade.
4955	Most arguments around Alexander's cause of death focus on his fever and abdominal pain.
4956	"Most British Columbians and most Canadians very seriously want governments to take meaningful action to address climate change.'
4957	Most economists warn that large and sustained tariff increases, along with likely retaliation from China and Mexico against American farmers and other exporters, will dampen global trade and drag on growth in the United States.
4958	Most girls would’ve chosen a different word.
4959	Mostly clear skies with just some passing clouds continue throughout the overnight hours as we struggle to cool down into the lower 70s.
4960	Mostly cloudy, with a high near 31.
4961	Most mosques and other American Muslim institutions are small, operate independently and don't have procedures in place to institute background checks or investigate complaints.
4962	Most of her major books tell not so much the story of an individual but of that person’s relationship with a small, often virtuous, clique of like-minded friends.
4963	Most of the album blends together in the form of passable album tracks.
4964	Most of the impact from the 40-day strike will hit in the fourth quarter.
4965	Most of the inhabitants of the kingdom of Dreamland were turned to stone, as Bean was spirited away by her long-lost mother, Queen Dagmar, who was revealed to be the evil sorceress responsible for cursing Dreamland.
4966	Most of them anyway.
4967	Most of them worked as the Slovakia representatives, because “there’s a rich Slovak heritage in this area” economics professor and team moderator Margarita Rose said.
4968	Most of the time, your experience isn’t all that matters, the hiring manager would like to know your skills and how much you’re interested in the position.
4969	Most of the work will be wrapped up this week — on Thursday, which was warm and sunny, the group was trying to finish the outside jobs and save the interior work for the expected rainy weekend.
4970	Most other sales take place in between or on these dates.
4971	“Most people do not feel they want to be represented by someone like that.
4972	Most recently, the worm and Sivana have teamed up in writer Geoff Johns and artist Dale Eaglesham's ongoing Shazam comic series, which started last December.
4973	Most states take a “hands-off” approach when it comes to provider reimbursements by their MCOs, the department says.
4974	Most Walmart locations will have extended hours on Friday and throughout the holiday weekend if they aren’t open 24-hours already.
4975	Mother Patty Clay said the producers at “Ellen” discovered Garrett from his recently created YouTube Channel “Garrett Clay’s LIFE Channel.”
4976	Motion Picture Corporation of America is taking a shot at Disney.
4977	Motorists are reminded to use caution and drive with heightened awareness when passing through active project areas.
4978	Motorists can find current gas prices along their route with the free AAA Mobile app for iPhone, iPad and Android.
4979	Motorists including drivers of MTC buses, school vans, ambulances and cars and motorcyclists have to negotiate narrow one-way stretches such as 13th Main Road, 15th Main Road to reach Second Main Road near the Tirumangalam Metro Rail station.
4980	Mountains and desert abut the Red Sea in northwestern Saudi Arabia, part of the area that planners say will become Neom.
4981	Mountain Street Stage — Paper Moon Shiners, 2 p.m., Fayetteville Public Library.
4982	Movement of privately-owned cars has also been restricted with those running on petrol and diesel allowed into New Delhi only on alternate days from 4 to 15 November, depending on whether they have even or odd numbered plates.
4983	Moving Capela might be tricky because of the length of his contract.
4984	Moving on to video encoding performance, we want to point out that video encoding usually doesn’t scale with core count as efficiently as 3D rendering.
4985	MP4 is a digital multimedia container format usually used to store video and audio; further details around how the MP4 files would need to be crafted were not disclosed.
4986	MPs with many different views may come together to give the Prime Minister a majority tomorrow.
4987	MP wants Haitians to replace the Bahamian workforce!
4988	Mr. Ajorlolo in addition said the action of the government is exemplified in the difficulty in passing legislative instruments to support the mental health act that was passed in 2012.
4989	Mr Akamugri said in Zebilla and Bolgatanga East Constituencies, most of the exhibition centres did not get their registers to start as stipulated by the EC.
4990	Mr. Altman’s 100-employee company recently built a system that could beat the world’s best players at a video game called Dota 2. Just a few years ago, this kind of thing did not seem possible.
4991	Mr. Beckworth, the state lawyer, asked Ms. Deem-Eshleman if her company fired McKinsey because of its recommendations.
4992	Mr. Booker, who is running for president, was Newark’s mayor from 2006 to 2013.
4993	Mr. Bullock, 53, has the kind of bipartisan bona fides and political résumé that would have often appealed to Democrats in years past, but it is not clear whether his brand of politics will resonate in an increasingly progressive base.
4994	Mr Cameron insisted the decision to hold a referendum was not one he took lightly – and was not taken because of the results of the 2014 European election, when Ukip emerged as a genuine threat to the Tories.
4995	Mr. Carson is preceded in death by his parents; Elmer and Mildred Salmon Carson and a sister; Janice Carson.
4996	Mr. Charron’s gamble has paid off so far.
4997	Mr. Cooper Group stock traded up $0.05 during trading on Thursday, hitting $9.15.
4998	Mr Corbyn responded on Twitter, saying: 'Donald Trump is trying to interfere in Britain's election to get his friend Boris Johnson elected.
4999	Mr Cummings’s new role is also likely to attract the negative attention of MPs.
5000	Mr Farage made his threat after Donald Trump told him during an LBC radio phone-in that Mr Farage and Mr Johnson would be ‘an unstoppable force’ if they linked up during the Election and could do ‘something terrific’.
5001	Mr. Gallab’s new album is called “Dépaysé,” a French word that means “to be removed from one’s habitual surroundings.”
5002	Mr Geddes remarked : 'He seems to have simply lost the plot.
5003	Mr. Harper also urged the international community to keep maternal and child health on the global development agenda after the Millennium Development Goals expire next year.
5004	Mr Hughes, who worked in construction, said: “I have voted Labour in the past.
5005	Mr Iddrisu argued that the US$200 million meant for four private companies could help establish more industries in the sector to boost productivity as well as mitigate the unemployment situation in the country.
5006	Mr. Isaac Oguzie will serve as the secretary.
5007	Mr Johnson refused to turn up.
5008	Mr Johnson said he had a 'very good' bilateral meeting with Mr Trump last night - although it took place behind closed doors and no photographs were allowed.
5009	Mr Johnson took aim at Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn's previous opposition to an election, and claimed Labour was not interested in delivering Brexit.
5010	Mr Karim vaguely remembers pushing a stalled motorboat that carried Major Tanko over from Lungi to Freetown when the troops started their offensive against the rebels.
5011	Mr. Katuka said Mr. Zulu is a threat to fellow citizens and does not deserve to move freely the way he is doing now.
5012	Mr Lafon said he had gone to refuel his chainsaw and was returning to the tree he was working on, adding: 'I heard Charley's saw was ticking over somewhere and then I saw him and ran over.
5013	Mr Leask's great-great-grandfather, William Hourston Leask, emigrated from the Orkney Islands to Australia in 1856 for the gold mining.
5014	Mr. Manson was lying on the ground when, the police said, Mr. Santos, 24, struck him in the head with a heavy metal bar early on Saturday morning, beating him beyond recognition.
5015	Mr. McConnell said Mr. Milbank’s work was not only overheated, but also had errors.
5016	Mr. Melzer said that Britain should not extradite Mr. Assange to the United States or to any other country that did not provide reliable guarantees that it would not transfer him to the United States.
5017	Mr Neil then asked him about Labour's higher dividend taxes, which he said would hit people on modest incomes too.
5018	Mr Ofori-Mensah told the committee that many of the non-teaching staff had gone on retirement and ought to be replaced.
5019	Mr. Patton said he still expected Westerveltto prosper over the next five to 10 years.
5020	Mr Prince Maliehe is the incumbent.
5021	Mr Redford said this was about venues "trying to inoculate themselves against further scandal".
5022	Mr. Saint-Jacques, who was Canada’s envoy to China between 2012 and 2016, told The Globe and Mail on Wednesday he found this directive to be particularly odd given that it concerned an authoritarian state.
5023	Mrs Asante-Agyei said this when she facilitated a media training workshop on infertility, organised by the Merck Foundation, in partnership with the GJA and the Rebecca Foundation for journalists across the country.
5024	Mr. Schiff, appearing on the ABC program “This Week,” said Sunday that the whistle-blower who triggered the inquiry would testify “very soon.”
5025	Mr. Schroeder goes on to say that, as a farmer, he very much prefers to plant.
5026	Mr. Schumer and Speaker Nancy Pelosi have been demanding that Mr. McConnell allow a vote on legislation, passed by the House, that would expand background checks to cover all gun purchases, including at gun shows and on the internet.
5027	Mrs May continued: “I am prepared to leave this job earlier than I intended to secure the right outcome for our country.
5028	Mr. Speaker, phase 2 promises to be exciting for Bermuda with the launch of the FinTech School’s Online Programme, which will allow all interested persons access to all their courses for FREE until November 17th 2019.
5029	Mr. Terry, long-time postal clerk at the Fort Myers Beach Post Office on Carolina St., retired earlier this summer to enjoy a carefree life of ease and relaxation.
5030	Mr. Thapar said it was a good opportunity for him to understand the Liberals Party.
5031	Mr Trump vowed to “act with urgent resolve” after 29 people were killed over the weekend.
5032	Mr Turner uses a pump to control his insulin levels and attaches it to a cannula in his stomach at night.
5033	Mr Zedller has an A++ rating from Texans for Vaccine Choice — the only lawmaker with that high of a rating — and has long promoted misleading claims surrounding vaccinations and childhood disease.
5034	Ms Allen also told Radio 4 about the difficulties of campaigning against established parties.
5035	Ms Arcuri added: "He didn't have to ignore me.
5036	MS Dhoni pulled up sore and he was replaced by Dinesh Karthik in the side, while Hardik Pandya, who was available for selection, replaced Vijay Shankar.
5037	Ms Donaldson, 36, was cleared of taking £3,213 in Harry Potter Merchandise.
5038	” Ms. Harris told the crowd.
5039	Ms Hindriks' post was duly translated into English and distributed by a member of Jobbatical's staff.
5040	Ms Simpson examined evidence from the scene of the 1982 blast, in which four members of the Royal Household Cavalry were killed and 31 other soldiers and civilians were injured.
5041	Ms Thunberg said her parents were "as far from climate activists as possible" before she made them aware of the issue.
5042	MTN, Shoprite and cable TV provider MultiChoice outlets were temporarily shut down and some were looted before police took control.
5043	Much of that growth will come through acquisitions of other software firms that complement CollabNet’s offerings.
5044	Much of the manufacturing will be done in Wales, and the deal is expected to create jobs in the UK.
5045	Mulheren said that lack of housing is hurting all local business, regardless of what type of business it is.
5046	Multiple other verified videos show protesters running from gunfire, or screaming in fear or anguish, and tending to those killed or wounded in the violence.
5047	Mulvaney told CBS’ “Face the Nation” that President Donald Trump is willing to enter into another shutdown in Feb. 15 if his demands for border wall funding are not met.
5048	Munson told the newspaper he discovered Hurst with the snakes.
5049	Murphy, a junior from Hattiesburg, Mississippi, played 10 games and caught 11 passes for 155 yards and one touchdown last season.
5050	Murtagh's political views put him at animosity with Jamie.
5051	Muschamp credits most of how he runs his program to Saban’s influence including how he prepares young players for big moments like Hilinski will face Saturday.
5052	Music is more accessible to consumers than ever before, yet artists are struggling and left in the dust even with a hit song.
5053	Muslims around the world pray toward the Kaaba daily, using compasses to help them pray in its direction.
5054	Mussatold he Guardian last week that he had been subject to threats and had been forced to move for fear of retribution.
5055	Muyshondt acknowledged in an interview with local TV that he met with gang members, but said it was to ask them to allow his party supporters to vote.
5056	MVHS officials say the model shows the public how the Regional Medical Center will contribute to the revitalization of Downtown Utica.
5057	“My analysis of religion in general, and of Islam in particular,” Harris wrote, “focuses on what I consider to be bad ideas, held for bad reasons, leading to bad behavior.
5058	My appeal to my generation is that for once, let us think about our legacy and help our young people by prioritising policies that benefit the youth and allocate larger budgets to them instead of Defence.
5059	My arms were so big and swollen, I couldn't take my own shirt off," Brenner said.
5060	“My aunt would show up at a Walmart or a Tops store, hobble up in her walker with seven or eight thousand in cash to get a money order to go to Jamaica,” he said.
5061	My best memories were riding Trimpers rides, eating Thrasher’s fries, and camping at Frontier Town.
5062	My biggest encouragement there were the Christian brothers.
5063	“My contract says that starting November 2020, so next year, I can record albums one through five all over again,” she said.
5064	My crop was not very good due to excessive rainfall throughout the monsoon and now the damage is such that no insurance coverage can compensate me for it.
5065	My dad is a character but is not someone who would make this up.
5066	My daughter is a medical doctor.
5067	My family came to the U.S. as migrants in the early ’20s during the period that was part of Operation Bootstrap, which was something the U.S. government set up to industrialize Puerto Rico’s economy.
5068	My fans call me Peach, so when her new song came out, I called to ask her about it, and she confirmed that the song was for me.
5069	My favourite recent episode from Johnson was on Twitter where he told his followers to vote Tory, as he had done, in the local elections.
5070	My former partner didn’t have any desire for interspecies company.
5071	My friends refer to me as ‘they,’ rather than ‘she’ or ‘he.’
5072	My generation is weary of these endless wars.
5073	“My girlfriend always mentions that when we go through like a drive-thru, my voice tends to get deeper,” one man said.
5074	“My government blew through my doors and killed my dogs.
5075	"My government, on its part, will continue to build an enabling environment to provide the private sector with the needed catalyst to operate profitably, grow and remain globally competitive," he said.
5076	My grandma began to pick me up from school and daycare.
5077	“My hair feels better once I’ve dyed it, like nothing ever happened.”
5078	My house is worth all this much, but there’s no way I can go anyplace.’
5079	My job is to ride the best, not be the only guy to stay on.
5080	My mom didn't even drive a car when he died, so she had to learn how to drive.
5081	“My natural instinct was: ‘Shoot, let me run down there.
5082	My objective has always been, how do I improve the lives of people?
5083	My only reservation about the performance of the SRM-Flex was that it didn’t seem to get as loud as its 1300 watt rating might lead one to expect.
5084	My only tip is to avoid the corn mazes that involve scarecrows, because we all know how those horror movies end.
5085	“My opinion is: He’s paid his price, and at the time that it happened, it was kind of unprecedented.
5086	My overly fluffy tummy started growling, and I began to feel feint, as it had been more than 15 minutes since I ate anything.
5087	My parents moved to Trenton so that my father could start his business, and she became a women’s buyer.
5088	My personal narrative revolved around how, during my junior year of high school, I went from a mediocre to straight-A student.
5089	My relationship with His Highness the Amir has always been strong.”
5090	My respect for Mormons remains unchanged.
5091	Mysterium (CURRENCY:MYST) traded down 0.1% against the dollar during the 24-hour period ending at 18:00 PM ET on March 17th.
5092	Mysuru, which is the home turf of former chief minister Siddaramaiah and sees a direct contest between BJP sitting MP Prathap Simha and Congress’ Vijayshankar, saw 68.72 per cent polling.
5093	“My thought so far is that Namibia is going have a free and fair election,” said the head of the African Union observer mission, Ernest Bai Koroma.
5094	My wife was there one minute and then I couldn't talk to her because she was under sedation all the time."
5095	Nachbar noted that Simakov voluntarily entered counseling as a result of the incident.
5096	Nadler indicated that the committee could launch proceedings on its own.
5097	Naija spirit is on the trajectory, irrepressible: soccer, music, name it!
5098	Nairobi Governor Mike Sonko has suspended two nurses at Dandora Health Centre, where a woman gave birth outside reportedly due to lack of a Sh20 registration fee.
5099	Nakita Holdaway thought it was a nightmare - a man had broken into the Westminster home she shared with brother Josh armed with an axe.
5100	Named “Calpeia”, a reference to the Rock’s classical name, her remains had been found and excavated, by archaeologists working with the Gibraltar National Museum, from a cave burial near Europa Point in 1996.
5101	Name the company that strikes fear into everyone’s hearts in business?
5102	NAN also reports that power supply was available in the coastal town but the supply to the commission was disconnected by the officials of the Eko Electricity Distribution Company (EKEDC).
5103	Nanded (Maharashtra): Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday compared the opposition Congress to a “sinking ship” which will take down all who are on it.
5104	Nany and Paulie get into a fight after the challenge.
5105	Narai-juku is a historic, picturesque part of Nagano that retains a historical row of Edo-period townhouses, or machiya.
5106	Narwal again revived a player but this defender too was eliminated by Pawan in his raid.
5107	NASA has announced that the twin Van Allen Probes that have been orbiting the Earth for over six years are entering their final phase of exploration.
5108	NASUWT Gibraltar members voted for strike action by 84% on a turnout of 61%.
5109	Natalie Portman's 20 best film performances – ranked!
5110	Nathan West’s (Ryan Paevey) death may be playing a part in this, too.
5111	National Geographic Society’s archeologist-in-residence, Fredrik Hiebert, joins Ballard and will lead a team to search for signs of Earhart on land following clues that may lead to the location of her bones.
5112	Nationally, in 2017, U.S. fire departments responded to 357,000 home structure fires.
5113	“Naturally, he won, proving that ‘longer recess’ is the childhood equivalent of ‘Mexico will pay for it.’
5114	Naturally, the most suspicious are soon vindicated, as the Black Order (known as the Children of Thanos in Avengers: Infinity War) crash the party to recover their fathers corpse.
5115	Nature is our only life support system.
5116	Navarre’s volleyball team survived a five-set battle with Pace last Tuesday for its second win of the year.
5117	NavCoin (NAV) traded up 1.1% against the dollar and now trades at $0.17 or 0.00004415 BTC.
5118	Nawaf Al-Ahmad, for his part, underlined the necessity of preserving the regional interests, expressing Kuwait’s readiness for establishing cooperation and negotiations since it will benefit the security and stability of the region.
5119	NBS said that leather prepared after tanning valued at N2.9 billion was exported to Spain.
5120	Nearby businesses said they had been unable to gain access to their units on the site due to the large police cordon.
5121	Nearing the end of his shift with the first power play unit, Hutsko picked up a loose puck near center ice and did everything by himself.
5122	Nearly 300 British Airways flights have been hit by contamination since the start of 2019 and unions are now demanding an industry wide inquiry.
5123	Nearly a century later, it later passed into the possession of the Marchioness of Cholmondeley Sybil Sassoon.
5124	Nearly six months after its 737 Max jets were grounded, Boeing is now close to applying to recertify the aircraft, according to sources, but the time frame for flights to resume remains murky.
5125	Negaunee finally got a big play, as quarterback Jason Waterman found wide receiver Alex Munson for a first down catch.
5126	Neither is hurt.
5127	Neither Morningstar nor its content providers are responsible for any damages or losses arising from any use of this information.
5128	Neither Rupp nor the girl were injured.
5129	Neither team controlled the momentum through a back-and-forth opening frame.
5130	NEO (NEO) traded down 1.5% against the dollar and now trades at $11.41 or 0.00147792 BTC.
5131	Nestlé doesn't seem to be the kind of company to have face.
5132	Netanyahu says such a government would be “a real danger to the people of Israel.
5133	Netanyahu stressed that the Jews will never abandon Al-Khalil, adding that his government approved the expansion of the Zionist settlement in the Old Town in Al-Khalil.
5134	Netflix was dead.
5135	Net income fell 32 percent to 14.2 billion yuan ($2.1 billion), missing the 17.55 billion-yuan average of estimates, on investments in content, cloud computing and financial technology.
5136	Net interest margin is taxable equivalent net interest revenue divided by average interest-earning assets.
5137	Network Rail said the plans were the best possible solution to preserve the line that connects Devon and Cornwall to the rest of the country.
5138	Neural networks and deep learning computations require huge amounts of compute resources and electricity.
5139	Neurofibromatosis can also be life-threatening.
5140	Neuro has a total market cap of $15,031.00 and approximately $1.00 worth of Neuro was traded on exchanges in the last day.
5141	Neurotypical people often become upset when common sense is not used, Maynard said.
5142	Never hike without telling someone where you are going and the route you will take.
5143	Nevermind the weirdness of drawing blood for such a stupid purpose, how long could that possibly last anyway?
5144	Nevertheless, Ambassador Sondland, in accordance with President Trump’s wishes, continued to pursue the statement into early September 2019.
5145	Nevertheless, if he is still alive, the public should also alert the nearest police station with vital information about him.
5146	Nevertheless, Pompey returned to the south coast with all three points.
5147	Newberry drove 58 yards in eight plays on its second possession of the game, countering a Lenoir-Rhyne field goal with a 40-yard Shea Rodgers kick to tie the score at 3-3.
5148	New challenges are now arising with the planned introduction of the National Health Insurance (NHI) scheme, which is intended to move South Africa closer to universal health coverage.
5149	New Delhi, April 7 (IANS) Before the Lok Sabha elections, a number of politicians switched parties hoping better prospects.
5150	NEW HAVEN, CT — Before you completely despair of the extreme partisanship and lack of grace that is the signature of the Trump era, know that American politics has had rougher times.
5151	New Mac Pro hits the FCC: Is Apple launching it soon?
5152	New Market Street restaurant, Florence's Lowcountry Kitchen, serves Thanksgiving Day featured dishes in addition to their full all-day regular menu.
5153	New Mexico State University will focus on improving the efficiency of Southwestern ranches by using systems models and linking the socioeconomic and environmental trade-offs associated with heritage cattle genetics, precision ranching and range finishing.
5154	New names, new faces,” Quinnipiac head coach Tricia Fabbri said.
5155	New private land-only trapping seasons were opened from Oct. 10 through March 31 in various units in Southern Idaho in an effort to prevent wolf expansion into the area and minimize potential wolf conflicts with livestock.
5156	Newsome led things off in the circle for East Clarendon.
5157	Newsom is rolling out a plan to make it easier for you to afford prescription drugs.
5158	New statistics from Public Health England estimate that around one in 14 people living with HIV in the UK remain undiagnosed - while 43% of people diagnosed last year were diagnosed late, which is after damage to the immune system has already begun.
5159	New studies published this week suggest a little exercise — brisk walks and moderate weight-lifting — can go a long way to helping people feel better.
5160	NEW YORK (CBSNewYork) – The NYPD has released new images of a man wanted in a jewelry store heist in Queens.
5161	NEW YORK — U.S. star Megan Rapinoe gave FIFA some kicks two weeks ahead of the World Cup, maintaining the sport’s top executives are not doing enough to close a huge gender disparity in investment.
5162	NEW YORK (WHEC) -- New York's attorney general is calling for state troopers to wear body cameras.
5163	NEXT (NET) traded 2.3% higher against the dollar and now trades at $1.19 or 0.00011840 BTC.
5164	Next Saturday: At West Alabama, 5 p.m.
5165	Next stop is Philadelphia, 30th Street Station.
5166	NFL Network Insider Ian Rapoport said earlier this week that "all options are still on the table," including a holdout.
5167	"NFL Today" host and CBS News special correspondent James Brown talks with the 30-year-old Wilson about his role as a mentor to students, and the Why Not You Foundation, which he founded to help empower today's youth.
5168	NG La Banda’s signature song “Santa Palabra” — translated as "Holy Word" — implores listeners to “Despojate!
5169	NGOs like the Association of Billion Minds (ABM), also known as Amit Shah’s team, have been behind much of the relentless propaganda that has been rolled out on behalf of the BJP.
5170	NGO workers have confirmed to us that they have supported refugees through the asylum process for up to 18 months.
5171	Nice tank job Cincy.
5172	Nickel slot dog off the edge, a Rod Marinelli staple.
5173	Nicki also opened up about her impeding nuptials, revealing she still can't decide whether she wants a big bash or a private gathering.
5174	Nick paid CD in magic.
5175	Nicola Sturgeon (left) and Jo Swinson (right) arrived in Sheffield for the QT special tonight.
5176	Nigeria is a great country with rich natural resources.
5177	Nigeria is a religious nation.
5178	Nigerians expect that the new senate must make laws that will reform the oil sector, the security systems, diversify our economy, create jobs and make doing business in Nigeria more competitive”.
5179	Nigerians get very little from their government, but decades of political failures haven’t yet lowered expectations.
5180	Night City, the venue of the game is going to get a fresh lease of life with the busy crowd technologies that the developer has created even though it might not be as gregarious as the postcards appear.
5181	“Nine Pin” won a Canadian Folk Music Award, a Stingray Rising Star Award and sent Kaia on an 18-month touring journey from Ireland to Iowa, including stops at The Kennedy Center, Hillside Festival and London’s O2 Shepherd’s Bush.
5182	Nisa Investment Advisors LLC now owns 9,000 shares of the company’s stock valued at $170,000 after buying an additional 2,700 shares during the period.
5183	Nissan (not Prosecutors) are just looking for dirt on Ghosn.
5184	No. 10 Michigan State (22-5, 13-3) vs. No. 7 Michigan (24-3, 13-3) Crisler Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Sunday, 3:45 p.m. EST BOTTOM LINE: No. 7 Michigan goes for its 11th straight win over ranked opponents…
5185	No. 12 Notre Dame (5-3, 1-1) exploited it all, dominating the first half and winning, 13-10.
5186	NOAA’s reach goes from the surface of the sun to the depths of the ocean floor as it works to keep the public informed of the changing environment around them.
5187	No adversary has challenged NATO's use of space for operations."
5188	Nobody should be on anybody else’s path.
5189	No. Don't go see a doctor.
5190	No doubt they all had a nice lunch and a laugh over ’s pretend anger at this: https://t.
5191	No EMPD: no visible policing, no formal, active and fully sustainable actions against law-breaking road criminals (yes, minibus taxis).
5192	No fasting, no cutting carbs, no restrictions what so ever.
5193	No fewer than 10 houses and properties worth millions of naira were destroyed by flood in different parts of Idanre Local Government Area of the state recently.
5194	No group has rights to a word that others cannot use.
5195	No, I don't think your view is skewed at all.
5196	Noie Manor, a third-year communication student studying abroad this fall, said she was unable to get any credit for her major with the courses she is taking in her study abroad program.
5197	“No, I have undertaken to lead the party and my country at a difficult time and I am going to continue to do that.
5198	No injuries were reported as of 1:15 p.m.
5199	Nollywood actress Princess Shingle is single again after her Senegalese fiancé was recently arrested over alleged fraud in New York.
5200	NOMA also known as Cancrum Oris is an infective destruction of tissue of the cheek, mouth or nose and at times, it affects the whole face when left untreated.
5201	No matter how much work we do!
5202	No matter the prayers, as long as corruption is in our nation,suffering will continue.
5203	No narrative is as persuasive as Miller’s.
5204	No nation can survive with a crooked leader or president that is also a serial womaniser.
5205	No need for those now.
5206	No Need To Change Strategy.
5207	“None of their lives were going well,” said Holtby.
5208	None of these patients had a family history of ALS or of other neurodegenerative disorders.
5209	None of these teams can stay away from these dudes.
5210	None of the tanks were recovered, and only a single man of the Calgary Regiment’s tank crews that went ashore returned to England.
5211	None of this, however, proved enough to unseat the embattled Venezuelan president.
5212	Nonetheless, any telecom company will find success in this environment by making these points a priority.
5213	Nonetheless, “It was still a great experience.”
5214	Nonetheless, the Fox Business video depicted Pelosi stumbling over words and replayed four times in rapid succession the speaker holding up two fingers when talking about "three things" related to House investigations of Trump.
5215	No officers or deputies were hurt.
5216	No one at the brewery based in Tadcaster, North Yorkshire, was available for comment but the doors to the pub remained closed yesterday.
5217	“No one has asserted my son did a single thing wrong,” Biden added, pounding his finger into the podium, “except a lying president.”
5218	No one has been convicted of treason since the aftermath of World War II.
5219	No one in cafe society gives a damn that a 15-year-old girl gives massages,” one source told the New York Post.
5220	No one knows how it will end.”
5221	No one should be targeted because a hateful minority cannot tolerate the differences that make our country great.
5222	No one was injured and there aren't any other threats to the school, police said.
5223	No one was injured in the event but many crucial supplies were lost.
5224	No one was more excited, though, than new mother Becky Radous.
5225	No one was transported to the hospital in this incident.
5226	No other buildings were damaged and the building was unoccupied.
5227	No parliament is entitled to define our past, and still less to exclude the Spaniards who differ in their definitions.
5228	Nor has there been any evidence of calls to 911 from anyone other than Sobieraj.
5229	Normalisation of Nigerian politics requires a wholesale repair of the damage wrought by this accident.
5230	NORMAN, Okla. (AP) — Oklahoma coach Lincoln Riley is best known for his quarterbacks.
5231	North America is expected to dominate the live cell imaging market in 2018.
5232	Northeast has witnessed tremendous development in the recent years in terms of infrastructure.
5233	Northern Trust Corp increased its holdings in shares of JPMorgan Alerian MLP Index ETN by 589.4% in the 4th quarter.
5234	North Korea’s ambassador to the UN in the run-up to that meeting said the U.S. was likely “behind the impure moves” of the EU nations, warning that such talks would strengthen “our desire to defend our sovereignty.”
5235	North Platte – The Bulldogs are sending another team to the state tournament in what has been a fantastic season all around for Bulldog athletics.
5236	Northport junior Luke Cacic finished first in the League 2 shot put eclipsing his personal best by 3 feet throwing 44’-5” Jan.
5237	Northrop Grumman will demonstrate an advanced electronic warfare suite and digital radar warning receiver prototypes for the U.S. Air Force F-16 fighter.
5238	Northwestern (3-3) stayed close throughout the game, and Pitt (6-2) held only a 45-40 lead with just over eight minutes left.
5239	Norway may have a significant mountain to climb, but it is too early to count them out.
5240	No screens in sight … role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons, now in its fifth edition.
5241	"Not all prosecutors could decide that they'd want to wait for the state capture inquiry to conclude before prosecuting.
5242	Not a lot to the match, though no prolonged rest-holds is always a good thing.
5243	Not as humid or hot."
5244	Not a thing wrong unless you heard the Adam Schiff version where he made up my conversation.
5245	No, the Division 2 South football final was not a moment for introspection.
5246	Nothing good can come out from this Man. He is just playing games as usual.
5247	'Nothing was the same for real.
5248	Noting that the Kano students are taking the lead in all their choice areas, she said the initiative of the Ganduje-led government will contribute to the development of the state and would be reflected as part of the legacies of his administration.
5249	Not in high school, not in college, not ever,” he said in his charged statement to the Senate Judiciary Committee following Ford’s testimony.
5250	“Not lots of fantastic chances, but good chances.”
5251	Not only that, but it has the quickest recharging times of all models on our list.
5252	Not quite Sammy Davis, Jr., but close enough, to confirm what men think of primarily, and on which their life depends, from all indications.
5253	Not today, anyway.
5254	Not to forget Democrats.
5255	Not to mention we may learn even more about Dean's character.
5256	Notwithstanding, there is no basis whatsoever for any concerns about unrest.
5257	Not your fault at all.
5258	Novacoin (CURRENCY:NVC) traded 0.5% higher against the U.S. dollar during the twenty-four hour period ending at 23:00 PM Eastern on August 23rd.
5259	November rapeseed futures in are a half-cent lower at $9.417 after holding steady yesterday.
5260	Now 21, he uses the stage name Bamm Holt and notes that while his family name may open some doors for him in the music industry, he does not expect to receive “a free ride.”
5261	Now aged 94, Philip was second in command of a landing craft that was transporting tanks on Gold Beach at La Riviere on the Normandy coast as part of Operation Overlord.
5262	Now, a little cold, he ran back to his truck to get some warmer clothing and a fresh flashlight.
5263	Now a new research further shows how green tea can help lower obesity.
5264	Now, a report has emerged revealing Facebook CEO's big plans to integrate the social networking sites' messaging services.
5265	Now, forensic scientists and artists have reconstructed the animal’s face.
5266	Now, he’ll be suiting up again, playing semi-pro soccer for Chesterfield-based Loko Football Club.
5267	Nowhere does the indictment say that this has anything to do with the Trump campaign, Russia, Wikileaks or the not existing relations between them.
5268	Now I am wondering if he ever stopped seeing her at all.
5269	Now, I LOVE when cast ‘right’.
5270	Now I'm f--king out.
5271	Now is also a great time to start looking for or solidifying job offers.
5272	Now is the time to put your emergency plan into action.
5273	Now it’s the Arabs are stealing the elections,” Ashkenazi said.
5274	Now, more than ever, our political climate calls on us to just believe, even if we may not know enough to say for sure.
5275	Now Mr Werfel represents the third wave, people who come into contact with the asbestos which is already present in the home, and are carrying out renovations.
5276	Now one of three women in the big leagues, the significance is not lost on her.
5277	Now on her 3rd marriage, her lot has not changed.
5278	Now, on to the second reason to tune into the Cavs’ 2019-20 debut.
5279	Now, people are optimistic to the efforts for peace and hope the efforts lead them to durable peace.
5280	Now, Ronald Reagan was a no less sunny personality and a past master, of course, of media relations.
5281	Now, the Bruins’ offense actually faces a defense that is statistically worse than the UCLA defense.
5282	Now the minimum wage can’t keep a momma and a baby out of poverty.”
5283	Now the Saints defense will have to game plan for both men.
5284	Now the U.S. Flag Code is stupidity?
5285	‘Now this has definitely sculpted the person that I am,’ ‘and I have tried to make each terrible experience somehow make me into a better person.
5286	Now, this right here is the perfect example of a great exclusive and it will be worth every penny.
5287	Now, we have to decide if we go to the Frizette or the Alcibiades.
5288	“Now we want the Penrith community to come along and grab a great cuppa when they visit either the Penrith Library or the Civic Centre.
5289	“Now what we’re facing is U.S. forces trapped between a Syrian-Russia army moving north to take on the Turkish army that is moving south,” Esper said.
5290	“Now you and your hero have something in common,” she said.
5291	Now you can, by commissioning an artwork from Royal Pet Pawtrait.
5292	Now you’re equipped with new information.
5293	“NPA problem has been comprehensively addressed by the government.”
5294	• NRCS now enrolls eligible, high ranking applications based on dollars rather than acres.
5295	NRG Energy has a 1-year low of $32.63 and a 1-year high of $43.66.
5296	NTR soul will truly rest in peace from today.
5297	NumerixS Investment Technologies Inc now owns 46,600 shares of the oil and gas producer’s stock worth $150,000 after buying an additional 41,600 shares in the last quarter.
5298	Nussmeier, who played quarterback at Idaho, has called plays at Alabama, Michigan and Florida.
5299	Nutrition research has come to a few strong conclusions, Fenton said: “Variety and moderation.
5300	Nutter can be heard in the background assuring Jayme that everything will be fine.
5301	Nyc holds CBD processors towards the same production requirements as supplement manufacturers — an increased club than most states — and needs extracts manufactured in hawaii become tested for contaminants.
5302	Oakland didn’t play starting quarterback Derek Carr or receiver Antonio Brown.
5303	Obaigbo said the wishes of two victims, who for various reasons withdrew their petition, will be respected.
5304	Obama lands on the ranking that lasts till January 5 with a song called “One Last Time (44 Remix)”.
5305	Obama received the famed award in 2009, less than nine months into his term in the White House for what the Nobel Committee said were “extraordinary efforts to strengthen international diplomacy” and his calls for nuclear nonproliferation.
5306	Obernolte further pointed out the legal liability that school staff face, since the substance is still recognized as a by the federal Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA).
5307	Oblivious to the inadequacies of the administrative apparatus, the judgment stipulates the draconian measure of eviction.
5308	O’Brien said Burns wants to establish the company’s headquarters in the Mahoning Valley.
5309	Observed ice scoop is stored on unsanitized exterior of ice machine.
5310	“Observing the flyover casually, it suddenly struck me that the flyover, though out of bounds for motorists, was proving to be useful for a host of people in many other ways.
5311	Obviously, the new league would like to create the impression that the games are well attended, because it’s hard for a TV viewer to get all that excited about watching games that no one bothers to watch in person.
5312	''Obviously, this is disappointing for everyone.
5313	“Obviously, you can see this was a difficult situation for all of the fire departments who responded to this event,” Thomas said.
5314	Ocasio-Cortez is hardly the only person demanding answers either, as Epstein’s victims have been robbed of their opportunity for justice.
5315	Oct. 1, 1910: Crowds gather outside the Los Angeles Times after the bombing of the newspaper building.
5316	October 21 through November 4, guests will receive any bottle of wine on the list for half off with every pound of stone crabs ordered, which comes out to about four to five large claws.
5317	October 29th, 2019 - on ValuEngine Upgrades Huami (NYSE:HMI) to “Buy”
5318	October 9, 2019 at 12:27 PMPGE has failed again to address the real issue which that they cannot handle a smart solution and have gradual phases when conducting a power outage.
5319	Odilim Enwegbara, Benjamin’s elder brother, shared the news on Friday describing his brother’s victory at the poll as the ”biggest news that ever happened to his family”.
5320	Odion Ighalo has shared adorable new images of his family.
5321	O'Donovan (FF) has exceeded the quota and is subsequently deemed elected and her surplus will be redistributed.
5322	OECD cut the India's GDP growth forecast by 1.3 percentage points to 5.9 per cent for 2019-20 due to economic slowdown- जल्द पटरी पर नहीं आ रही भारतीय अर्थव्यवस्था!
5323	Of 529 men with a low amount of disease on imaging scans, 90% taking enzalutamide were alive compared with 82% taking another NSAA.
5324	Of course, everything is themed House Stark, with each item bearing the signature sigil of a grey direwolf.
5325	Of course, many shenanigans ensued.
5326	Of course, technically, darts are weapons, too.
5327	Of course, that move upset his grandfather Victor Kiriakis (John Aniston) and the other residents of the mansion.
5328	Of course their executives got $25m in bonuses, because they drove it to bankruptcy shouldn’t matter, right?
5329	Of course, there will be no three-pedal option this time but rather a seven-speed S Tronic dual-clutch automatic transmission paired with standard quattro AWD.
5330	Of course, you can “train Google” to not mark those messages as important, but that is another distraction.
5331	'Officers attended and found two men dead inside the property and the body of a third man in a car outside the property.
5332	Officers flooded the small community of Otautau on Wednesday night after the boy was found dead.
5333	Officer Shaun Parker, 32, an 11-year veteran, assigned to the Narcotics Strike Force.
5334	Officers in Stonehaven are appealing for information following the vandalism of two cars on Arduthie Road.
5335	Officers responded at 6:39 a.m. to reports of shots fired at the store, according to an announcement from Assistant Chief Jim Savage.
5336	Officers say they also found marijuana and weapons inside the club.
5337	Official Receiver David Chapman said the property deal, for an undisclosed sum, would provide opportunities for a "significant number" of former Thomas Cook workers.
5338	Officials added there is no indication Kurita poses a threat to the public, but fear he may be a danger to himself.
5339	Officials aren’t saying why they suspect arson and say only that if releasable information becomes available, the public will be updated.
5340	Officials said there was no evidence that Keleher or Ávila-Marrero had personally benefited from the scheme.
5341	Official statistics define long-term migrants as those who move to a country other than that of their usual residence for a period of at least a year.
5342	Often flash floods can occur within minutes and, in a mountainous area, sometimes without any sign of rain.
5343	Often, they end up destitute.
5344	Often, West Africa and France simply share the table: here a delicate salad of shaved fennel, there a tumble of fried ripe plantains, given a kiss of salt to smooth out the sweetness.
5345	Of the 109 reports of discrimination that Kick It Out received related to grassroots football, 40% were specifically related to youth football and it is in this area that Townsend has called for particularly strong measures.
5346	Of the 4 billion cigarette-related deaths in the world each year, about half a billion are women.
5347	Of the currently five hybrids, only Bangladesh and Pakistan have ever been categorised as democracies in the 43 years covered by the GSoD Indices.
5348	Of the Cypress Towne Lake location, owner Amber Garcia says "We're so excited to be able to expand our family driven vision of what a Mexican restaurant can be."
5349	Of the European leaders, the worst offender was France's Emmanuel Macron, who emitted circa 7645 tonnes of CO2 over 127,708 miles and 77 flights, ranking him fifth.
5350	Of the total 43 toll plazas in the State, 30 of them are ready for the new mode, and work is in progress at the remaining 13.
5351	Of Yaniv’s other alleged activities, I will not disturb your stomachs with full recount.
5352	Ogbeh stated this when he hosted a delegation of the Idoma Development Forum led by Dr. Jacob Okwori who paid him a visit in Abuja to seek clarifications on insinuations surrounding his non reappointment as Minister.
5353	Ohio fell on Saturday to Pittsburgh in the Steel City by a 20-10 tally.
5354	“Ohio State’s been really good on both sides of the ball.
5355	Oil news disappear off de pages and dem boys want to know whether Roger Khan’s release wasn’t a diversion.
5356	Ojajuni, the Divisional Police Officer and their men cordoned off the area, making sure nobody escaped from the scene.
5357	O.J. was apparently not the only Andrew Luck fantasy football owner upset over the abrupt decision.
5358	Ok, he calls himself a ‘democratic socialist’.
5359	OK, Mr Master of the deal - why isn't Mexico paying?
5360	OK, now for the dough.
5361	Olamide and Lil Kesh were made the scapegoats due to the content of their song believed to be promoting money rituals.
5362	Olivia Colman, whose performance as the temperamental Queen Anne in Yorgos Lanthimos' The Favourite was lauded by both the critics and the audiences, has been made CBE (commander of the order of the British Empire).
5363	Olubalogun Lawrence, told the court that the defendant committed the offence sometimes in May 2016 at Multverse Quarry, Ajebo Road in Abeokuta.
5364	Oluwayemi joined the Scottish champions on a three-year deal.
5365	Omar and Tlaib last year became the first two Muslim women elected to Congress.
5366	Omashola also picked a quarrel with Diane and Venita later on Friday evening after he was accused of calling their teammates ‘weaklings’.
5367	“Omfg yes our new anthem, thank u kesha, another praised.
5368	Omoyele Sowore, who as a minor candidate challenged President Muhammadu Buhari in February elections, was first arrested in August and pleaded not guilty to charges of treason, money laundering and harassing the president.
5369	“On 23 February this year he fought with my friend and pelted me with stones.
5370	ON a 4th and 1 in the second quarter, Mahomes was seen grabbing his knee.
5371	On a live panel covering Wednesday’s impeachment hearing, Conway declared that Trump’s attempt to leverage aid to Ukraine was “astonishing,” describing it as the “ultimate impeachable offense.”
5372	On a more serious note, none of this matters really.
5373	On a night of countless cool moments, two stood out for me.
5374	On another note, I think all logical gun owners and supporters of the 2nd amendment agree on one thing – people that turn in their guns for gift cards should not own guns period.
5375	On another third-and-11 play in the fourth quarter, Shepherd found some space downfield near the boundary and hauled in a pass thrown well over his head.
5376	On April 10, a star plaque commemorating late Georgian Prime Minister Zurab Zhvania in front of the Council of Europe headquarters in Strasbourg.
5377	On April 18, 2012, Finklea reportedly witnessed Morris, who was his neighbor, kill 29-year-old Jazzmon Parker.
5378	On Aug. 22, the administration gave up on its push for across-the-board cuts in foreign aid.
5379	On average, analysts expect that Builders FirstSource will report full year sales of $7.14 billion for the current fiscal year, with estimates ranging from $7.03 billion to $7.34 billion.
5380	On average, equities analysts predict that Kemper Corp will post 5.65 EPS for the current fiscal year.
5381	On average, equities research analysts expect that Honeywell International Inc. will post 8.1 earnings per share for the current fiscal year.
5382	On average, equities research analysts expect that Sanmina will post 2.98 earnings per share for the current year.
5383	“On behalf of the officers and men of NDLEA, Cross River State Command, I congratulate you on your re-election as the Executive Governor of Cross River State”, the letter reads in part.
5384	Once again, the Kenai Peninsula Borough School District will have decisions to make weighing competition and student safety.
5385	Once airborne, it will be able to cruise between 190 and 250 mph, and it will have a driving range of about 70 miles.
5386	Once established, perennial pea can be difficult to eradicate.
5387	Once he ditched the USO suit, Steve Rogers suited up ready to do battle in World War II.
5388	"Once I got to know her, I realized how great she was and fell in love.
5389	Once that is done, they should be given basic human rights.
5390	Once the briefs were wrapped up, we went out to visit our Royal Bermuda Regiment staff in different locations.
5391	Once the clock struck 0:00 and the dream became a reality for Tatum and other St. Louis fans, he did what many other fans did and took to Twitter to express his excitement.
5392	Once the interface was successfully built, a trial period began in the summer of 2018 and ended in fall.
5393	Once the realization sank in that evening, Émile Couture hid the files under his mattress.
5394	Once the United States and South Korea formally began deploying THAAD, China wasted little time in taking steps to implement informal sanctions across a range of industries to economically coerce South Korea.
5395	Once your episodes air, share them (thoughtfully, not in a way that inundates your followers).
5396	One activity was reported about the Navajo tribal members resuming raids on Pueblo villages and other villages in northern New Mexico.
5397	“One change we didn’t expect from Trump’s presidency was an explosion of books from anti-Trump books to books calling him the second coming of Christ, we’ve seen it all,” Noah noted.
5398	"One colleague who was around in the Howard era told me that this is what government is supposed to feel like."
5399	One commenter noted that a Daphne is what you reach for when you don’t have a Fred or a Shaggy.
5400	One consistent aspect of Zack Snyder’s superhero films is the role he’s given to the media.
5401	One crisis after another led to the present-day catastrophe that has harmed many, from Venezuelan citizens to major players in the world economy.
5402	One doctor spoke of a toxic culture of intimidation.
5403	One doesn’t wish to imagine how many “ownership agreements” that buys.
5404	One driver died in the altercation and another was hospitalized and later expired at the hospital.
5405	One equities research analyst has rated the stock with a sell rating, nine have given a hold rating and thirteen have assigned a buy rating to the stock.
5406	One equities research analyst has rated the stock with a sell rating, two have given a hold rating and ten have assigned a buy rating to the company’s stock.
5407	One ExclusiveCoin coin can now be purchased for about $0.0607 or 0.00000907 BTC on exchanges including Upbit, Bittrex, CryptoBridge and CoinExchange.
5408	One fan addressed this question to J.K. Rowling on Twitter, asking why he would do such a thing since he was so abusive.
5409	One for the memory books!
5410	One IceChain token can now be purchased for approximately $0.0001 or 0.00000004 BTC on major cryptocurrency exchanges including Graviex and Switcheo Network.
5411	One InternationalCryptoX token can now be bought for $0.0006 or 0.00000016 BTC on popular cryptocurrency exchanges including LATOKEN, CoinBene, Hotbit and IDEX.
5412	One investment analyst has rated the stock with a hold rating, five have assigned a buy rating and one has issued a strong buy rating to the company’s stock.
5413	One is when a pride of lions is discovered having their lunch in the middle of the Jungle Cruise.
5414	One June and July “the travel rate was upward of 90%,” Anderson said.
5415	One lawsuit representative of this line of argument is Ohio’s, which goes after Purdue; Endo; Teva and subsidiary Cephalon; Johnson & Johnson and subsidiary Janssen Pharmaceuticals; and Allergan.
5416	One match of their tour remains, a training game against a mix of Aston Villa’s first team and reserves on Thursday, after the friendly at Queens Park Rangers last Saturday was cancelled because of a “misunderstanding”.
5417	One May 3, in 1967, Gov. Ronald Reagan was scheduled for lunch with eighth-grade schoolkids on the Capitol grounds.
5418	One moment captured on video, when she explained why she thinks businesses and wealthy people should pay more taxes, went viral and helped cement her reputation with the party’s left wing.
5419	One night, a guard left a door unlocked and the couple seized their chance to finally escape.
5420	One of country music's biggest DIY success stories, neo-traditional singer dons his Red Bandana (Big Label, 2019).
5421	One of its big decisions was to spend hundreds of thousands of dollars each year on a flavourless glaze to put on its burger buns so they would glisten better in photos.
5422	One of my favorite Chris Rock jokes came from his “Never Scared” album.
5423	One of my friends who attended the send-forth organized for me was killed.
5424	ONE of Nigeria’s leading commercial banks, Sterling Bank Plc, last weekend joined other corporate organisations to mark the World Clean-up Day (WCD) and the International Coastal Clean-up Day at over 20 locations nationwide.
5425	One of the aims of the council’s 25-year city centre masterplan is to increase pedestrianisation and improvement of walking, bus and cycling infrastructure.
5426	One of the big landowners of Glen Etive is the National Trust for Scotland, which facilitated the James Bond Skyfall scene that was filmed in the area.
5427	One of the contractors, Amaka Njinaka-Ogundipe of Etech, said she was given a contract without mobilisation but executed the project using her money, adding that the project was ready for hand over.
5428	One of the early standouts is a female rapper from Torrance, California, Los Angeles named Rae Khalil.
5429	One of the female suspects whose name cannot be disclosed for security reasons told the President that some named police officers tortured her and her friends and grabbed phones from them so that she cannot be in contact with her relatives.
5430	One of the longest-running shows in West End and Broadway history, the London stage production of received its world premiere at the New London Theatre in 1981—where it played for 21 record-breaking years and almost 9,000 performances.
5431	One of them involves trading Draymond Green in February.
5432	One of them is oat.
5433	One of the most enjoyable and accessible routes leads up Mount Tenjo, on the eastern shore of Kawaguchiko.
5434	One of the problems that have come forward is the meal plan.
5435	One of the reasons I work on climate change is because I worry about the impact it could have on endangered species.
5436	One Oyster token can currently be purchased for $0.51 or 0.00008001 BTC on exchanges.
5437	One point behind Alex Scott.
5438	One protester said that at the protest on October 3, he heard security forces calling out that if the crowds did not disperse, they would open fire.
5439	One reoccurring trope has surrounded Loughlin’s possible prison time.
5440	One research analyst has rated the stock with a hold rating and three have assigned a buy rating to the company.
5441	One resident told AFP that the crash happened around 2am.
5442	One Response to “City thanked for role in success of Kainai Transition Society Job Ready Program”
5443	One said: “It really Looks good on you!
5444	One sister, Ruth Kelly, of Phildelphia, PA.
5445	One state lawmaker, who requested anonymity to speak frankly, said some candidates and activists frustrated by the endorsement fail to grasp the scope of the race, which will be a top contest for control of the Senate.
5446	One such transgression comes from North Dakota.
5447	One suspect entered the restaurant to look around and signalled to others that they could come in.
5448	Ones who have gobs of cash but absolutely zero taste or desire to hunt for anything of real value.
5449	One TERA coin can currently be purchased for approximately $0.0070 or 0.00000068 BTC on exchanges including CHAOEX and BigONE.
5450	One that fell flat, true, but a sally nonetheless.
5451	One thing most people don’t realize is, you don’t get into magic cause you like to fool people, you get into magic cause you like to be fooled.
5452	One thing’s for sure: If J.Lo and A-Rod do welcome a baby into the world, that little one will be be quite the looker!
5453	One thing that does unite the parties: voters’ widespread interest in the presidential campaign, even at this early phase.
5454	One time my mom gave me this Muppet-like puppet that my aunt had bought for me.
5455	One train was traveling from Sylhet, a city in eastern Bangladesh, to the southern coastal city of Chittagong, when it collided with a Dhaka-bound train traveling from Chittagong in the opposite direction.
5456	One Viberate token can currently be purchased for approximately $0.0232 or 0.00000640 BTC on popular cryptocurrency exchanges including Livecoin, OKEx, Bittrex and Bancor Network.
5457	One V Systems coin can now be purchased for $0.0753 or 0.00001867 BTC on popular exchanges including BitForex, KuCoin and Bitfinex.
5458	One way the YMCA is looking to address the affordability issue is to partner with various businesses in order to provide subsidies to families.
5459	On Friday, authorities released a surveillance image of a suspect in the hopes that someone will recognize him and come forward.
5460	On Friday, Mexico’s top farm lobby said López Obrador should target agricultural goods from states that support Trump’s Republican party if the American leader carries out his threat.
5461	On his birthday, we bring you some of the rare photos of senior Bachchan.
5462	Onifade writes for New Agency of Nigeria (NAN).
5463	Onigbanjo stressed that the state needed to stop judges from using long hands to write, and that there were some laws in Lagos State that have not been reviewed since the 60s and “we need to check this.”
5464	On Instagram, Rhett shared video of his AMAs performance — or rather, his daughters' dance party to his performance.
5465	On its own, this is impressive stuff for a guy clocked in at 5' 8" by the NFL's infamously optimistic measurement sticks.
5466	On its release in May 2015, the Mondeo was hyped for being technology and safety rich rather than a rewarding driver’s car.
5467	“On June 26,” Towers began, “…the petitioners brought their petition to the Board of Elections, and submitted it for the county charter.
5468	Only 2⃣ more sleeps until pro wrestling history.
5469	Only Apple News has made a serious effort to combine serious journalism from major organizations.
5470	Only by providing a critical balance of economic and political concessions to rural areas can we prevent the urban plutocracies from dictating terms to the rest of society.
5471	Only perfection is acceptable.
5472	Only recently, a student from the tenth grade approached me about participating in an art contest, and I had never even taught him before.
5473	Only the white pumpkin was baked.
5474	On May 15, 2004, Garrett was responding to a robbery call at the old Cobourg Hospital.
5475	On mental health, Mr Llamas lamented that there is still a long way to go before it is treated equally to that of physical health.
5476	On Monday, McGregor was arrested in Miami Beach for allegedly destroying and stealing the mobile phone of a man who was attempting to take his photograph.
5477	On Monday, September 23, 2019, the City of Lubbock with Barricades Unlimited will install new traffic control permanently closing Avenue L between 9th and 10th Streets.
5478	On November 18, the school’s Inter House male and female five-over softball cricket competition will be held at MYO and GNIC SC grounds, while the Guyana Islamic Trust Inter Jamaat futsal competition will be held at the National Park tarmac from 08:30hrs.
5479	On October 3rd, the City Council unanimously approved a contract with Visu-Sewer of St. Louis to provide closed circuit television (CCTV) inspection of the city’s roughly 75,000 linear feet of sanitary sewer.
5480	On Saturday, while approaching Christchurch General Hospital, this reporter noticed a group of volunteers busily unloading boxes of food for visiting families – all of it halal.
5481	On September 14, 2019 Brandyn Tyler Wilmoth departed this life for his eternal life.
5482	On some products, ratios of 100:1 were possible, which is partly why most punters lose money – a small underlying move can mean wipeout.
5483	On Sunday, they received 11 reports of vehicles being entered by unknown suspects, with at least four thefts occurring from those break-ins.
5484	On Sunday, West hosted a Sunday Service in a church parking lot in Los Angeles.
5485	On that day, there seemed to be an unspoken rule everyone adhered to, including my parents whose relationship had started to break down: that you put your worries and differences to one side — a true break from reality.
5486	On the 161st Street subway platform, and massed in and around Yankee Stadium for Games 3 and 4 of the American League Championship Series, plenty of fans were adorned in Yankee jerseys bearing No. 2, the number of franchise icon Derek Jeter.
5487	On the Bollywood front, Bachchan will next be seen in the movies Brahmastra, Gulabo Sitabo and Jhund.
5488	On the contrary, I campaigned and I will always campaign against all forms of racism, including Islamophobia and anti-Semitism.”
5489	On the defensive side, Jersild said he and his coaching assistants are emphasizing effort and technique.
5490	On the east bank of the Hudson River in Westchester, just 25 miles from Manhattan, is Sleepy Hollow!
5491	On the flip side, he’s to dictators, taken the word of his own intelligence agencies, off Saudi Arabia’s murder of a U.S. resident, and classified information to Russians in the Oval Office.
5492	On the increasing car theft and burglary in the Federal Capital Territory, FCT, he said,” Currently we have about 20 different points where we monitor on daily basis through CCTV Cameras within FCT and we are expanding it to cover the remaining areas.
5493	On the inside of the Watch Series 5, a lot has remained the same as in the previous generation.
5494	On the lower end, instances of server intrusion will be rewarded 1,000 CHF ($1,000), and participants can get 100 CHF ($100) for pointing out any code that goes against best security practices.
5495	On the morning of July 4, at around 11:00 a.m., Grande Prairie RCMP responded to an incident involving a travelling group offering paving services at discounted prices.
5496	On the numbers, I’ll call it just a very questionable idea.
5497	On the one hand, it’s good to know that when nothing else is working, giving the ball to the best player in the world is the simple fall-back plan.
5498	“On the outside, Betty is this 1940s blond bombshell, but the closer to you get to her, you realize she’s so strange, theatrical and smart,” Flahive said in a telephone interview.
5499	On the sidelines, Coughlin seniors Jordyn Simonson and Kelsey Smith said they were a bit sad that they won’t see the fully combined version of the school, but that people do seem to be taking to the unification well.
5500	On the stage, he said: “I am not the fellow Jim Cagney at all.
5501	On the streets, we oppose the new stadiums with all our hearts because BB and Nomads as sports businesses should not be subsidised.
5502	On the Tigers’ next defensive possession, Jacob Boots made a terrific play in coverage.
5503	On the various advancements in cars, he said that the vehicles have become ‘iPhones’ on wheels with lot of electronic computing powers and connectivity.
5504	On the whole, advancing cooperation with China is one of the main directions in efforts of Gomel Oblast municipal authorities and local companies to diversify target markets.
5505	On this day in Alabama history: Pulitzer Prize winner Hazel Brannon Smith diedHer editorials were steadfast 'in the face of great pressure and opposition.'
5506	On this day in August, delicate Bavarian prawns were a recent catch, and served with watermelon cubes, skyr (a type of Icelandic yogurt), a lightly herbal sauce and tarragon cress.
5507	On this occasion, when 49 individuals of Muslim faith have been murdered in Christchurch, New Zealand – I have received many messages of support and love.
5508	On this week’s EFL Matters, ex-West Bromwich Albion head coach Darren Moore tells David Prutton about his time in charge at The Hawthorns and how his sacking came as a surprise.
5509	On Thursday, some NEEDS clients demonstrated a dance from Congo to youth at the NEEDS after school program.
5510	"On Thursday we've got a wind change moving through as well which will make firefighting more challenging," she said.
5511	On Tuesday night relatives said they were yet to hear from the family and feared the worst.
5512	On Tuesday, the veteran outfielder announced he is indeed headed to the Japan to start the next chapter of his career.
5513	On Wednesday, pro-Beijing lawmakers said protesters had crossed a moral bottom line, echoing recent statements by Beijing that signs of “terrorism” were emerging in Hong Kong.
5514	On Wednesday, Rep. Underwood shared a video of her taking her first constituent call after moving into her office.
5515	On Wednesday, the Irish Data Protection Commission, which oversees Facebook in Europe, said it was examining the activity for possible violations of the EU’s strict privacy rules.
5516	On weekends, grandfathers can be seen playing with grandchildren in front yards, while other neighbours host outdoor gatherings.
5517	On what he will want to be remembered for, Malami declared "I want to be remembered as one who intensify the fight against corruption and make our system of governance effective and efficient.
5518	Open the bag and check the seeds every few weeks, shaking them around as you check for germination.
5519	Opera performances happen every semester on campus, and every other year a big opera with an orchestra is organized.
5520	Opposition leader Mukesh Agnihotri Agnihotri alleged the investors meet was the “biggest scam in the history” of the state.
5521	Oprah often calls it “being your authentic self.”
5522	Opt for a non-traditional party with a perfectly Insta-worthy pink set-up, complete with buckets of Smirnoff Seltzer’s Rosèwhich include four flavors, raspberry, apple, peach and strawberry.
5523	Or, as older-school evaluator Mike Zimmer sums up Bradbury’s first five NFL games, “I think he’s had some ‘welcome-to-the-NFL’ moments, but then last week I think was his best game.”
5524	Or firing shotguns at them.
5525	Or if some mean old crank worked in the George W. Bush administration and then got fired by the Trump administration, yeah.
5526	Original lithographs from the illustrations in Maya Angelou’s book “Our Grand Mothers” by John Biggers and various selections by Dean Mitchell who illustrated Angelou’s book “Music, Rivers Deep in My Soul,” will also be a part of the exhibition.
5527	Or is it that the only people who ever seem to face any consequences connected to the war are those who took matters directly into their own hands, as a matter of patriotic duty, integrity, and basic humanity, and blew whatever whistle they could?
5528	Orlando's a good guy."
5529	Or maybe there are nothing but emotional payoffs, depending on your expectations.
5530	Orr was CBS’s first African American principal in the school’s 143-year history.
5531	Or that religion is keeping us all enslaved?
5532	Or that they go where locals shrink from in revulsion.
5533	Or, the Navy may have accidentally discarded or released radiation sources that were stored and utilized in its radiation schools around the island – radium-226, cesium-137, plutonium, tritium, cadmium, cobalt, strontium and krypton.
5534	Or worse, from the last decade?
5535	Or worse, they may not be fully aware of what they’ve consumed that night.
5536	Or you could opt for full-time asset management.
5537	Osborne Partners Capital Management LLC acquired a new position in shares of Palo Alto Networks Inc (NYSE:PANW) in the fourth quarter, according to the company in its most recent filing with the SEC.
5538	Osinbajo, who was represented by his Special Assistant on Policy and Research, Mr. Chris Ngwodo, said those commitments underpinned a foreign policy that was typically described as ”Afrocentric.”
5539	Osram Licht (FRA:OSR) was given a €35.00 ($40.70) target price by analysts at Nord/LB.
5540	Other cities today link subsidized housing developments with libraries, New York included, but Chicago’s outgoing mayor, Rahm Emanuel, has made a point of touting the concept, and seeing it through in ways other mayors haven’t.
5541	Other events of the Festival are going on as scheduled.
5542	Other events they host include sushi and movie nights in an attempt to establish a community and friend groups on campus, he said.
5543	Other exports include additives for lubricating oils at N1.5 billion and Malt not roasted at N1.3 billion.
5544	"Other major offenses" grew from 317 to 367. Physical attacks grew from 34 the previous year to 128.
5545	Other members and administrators have made posts in favor of both candidates and their campaigns.
5546	Other options include electronic recreation permits analogous to hunting and fishing licenses that would have to be bought by visitors to use trails, beaches and other natural resources.
5547	Other products include the Real Estate Investment Trust or REITs as well as short selling of securities.
5548	Other representatives at the press conference with Manni spoke about the effect Clark’s death has had on his children, saying that the two young boys will have to grow up “defending their father” instead of loving their father.
5549	Others charge into him whipping and roaring, attempting to take the headless calf from him.
5550	Other services will be private.
5551	Others have alleged that they have been barred from sitting their exams for failing to pay 80 per cent of user fees.
5552	Others have written letters bidding their family goodbye or drafted wills that specify what to do with their belongings.
5553	Others include the rehabilitation of the airport terminals in Abuja, Lagos and Port Harcourt.
5554	Other social media posts hinted at a conspiracy theory that Trump would become suddenly ill if he had to surrender his tax returns to Congress.
5555	Others (R) getting mentioned include US Reps.
5556	Other than the city, players have access to the hideout, which serves as a general hub for accepting missions, recruiting new soldiers, and trading supplies.
5557	Other than Wydad’s complaint about CAF’s rematch ruling, CAS said then, its case for winning the match was not legally compelling.
5558	Other transportation providers are making accommodations for some of the displaced traffic.
5559	"Otherwise, MLS is in my view currently struggling with public trust issues on post-election matters largely because it's president is a brother to DPP director of legal affairs.
5560	Otherwise, the opening was good.
5561	Otherwise we will continue to get these vague promises that focus on home ownership, which really just puts more Canadians in debt without getting the government back in the business of providing dedicated, affordable, non-market rental housing.
5562	Oti advised APCON to think smarter and get more creative with the process before jumping into serving letters to $5 a day instagram advertisers.
5563	Our armed forces are battle-hardened.
5564	Our colleague investigated what federal regulators responsible for ensuring the safety of the jets knew about that system.
5565	Our conception of what is and isn’t acceptable in long-term relationships has expanded tremendously in recent years.
5566	Our concerns have consistently been ignored by MBTA management.”
5567	Our coverage begins with a 4:30 p.m. PT pre-game show.
5568	Our desire is to even see him at our church one day," Brown said.
5569	Our experience was a bit better when playing songs directly through a wired connection or through a pen drive, but not by much.
5570	"Our fans are behind our team, it's amazing how they cheer, very loud," said Pouliot.
5571	"Our findings are consistent with theories of vocal traits related to personality," Dietrich said.
5572	“Our game plan was to shut down Boone and Vargas, those were the two who hurt us in the regular season game.
5573	Our government stopped it.
5574	“Our Grand Marshal this year is Justice Marilyn Kite, and she has played a significant role in the women’s movement in Wyoming.”
5575	"Our guest relations team have spoken to everyone on board to offer return tickets to the park as compensation for the inconvenience."
5576	Our hearts are SO full of love and joy!
5577	“Our integration with ARIA SDS helps security teams standardize their incident response processes, execute repeatable tasks at scale, and accelerate time to detect and respond to threats.
5578	Our kids are fired up.
5579	Our Lady of Guadalupe, also known as the Virgin of Guadalupe, is the patroness of all of the Americas.
5580	Our main concern was, “where will all the pieces go?”
5581	“Our members are committed to providing genetic solutions to the beef cattle industry that maintain our long-held position as a leader in th.
5582	Our Milky Way galaxy is truly warped, at least around the edgesIt turns out our Milky Way galaxy is truly warped, at least around the far edges.
5583	“Our most famous piece is the wild horse,” said guide Kristina Häfele.
5584	"Our next production, in spring 2020, will focus on arts in local schools and will feature only area youths," says Carpenter.
5585	“Our partnership with ASEAN is built around the key pillars of connectivity, capacity-building, commerce and culture,” he said.
5586	Our president this week was greeted with some of the finest polling numbers of his administration.
5587	“Our priority is the health and safety of all involved, and we trust all parties will act respectfully and responsibly as they work toward a resolution,” it said in a statement.
5588	“Our problem is that our town struggles with a widespread and long-lasting perception that we are dominated by bigotry and racism,” said a message on the city’s website.
5589	Our problem is that we are trying to go left and right at the same time.
5590	Our question: What is a front-office member looking for?
5591	"Our staff will be monitoring the tides and operating the sluice gates on the coastal rivers if necessary.
5592	'Our story has become the landmark case society needs to recognise the true severity of coercive control.'
5593	Our strategic interest in the peace agreement with Jordan and the close security cooperation with its king is ten times more important to Israel than control of the Jordan Valley.
5594	Our studies on the challenges facing the nation, particularly great power competition, reinforced how important the job we have here at the NTC is.”
5595	Our sweet matriarch, Betty Ann Lebow Yearwood, in her typical understated fashion, slipped away on Sunday evening, November 17th, after being surrounded by her family all weekend.
5596	Our thoughts and prayers are with our neighbors, Rice County Sheriff’s Office.
5597	“Our total capacity for this first phase of four is 2.5 MW, we have got 9600 solar panels here and we have connected them in series which we call a string,” Bvirakare said.
5598	“Our walks are a wonderful opportunity for everyone to come together to help end this disease and to raise critically needed funds for Alzheimer’s research and local support services.”
5599	Outgoing FFA state President Cory Sinkule holds up a commemorative plaque during the State FFA convention at the Fort Worth Convention Center, Friday, July 19, 2019.
5600	Outgoing World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) vice-president Linda Helleland has claimed she was spied on by Norwegian companies acting "on behalf of Russian interests" during the fallout from the state-sponsored doping scandal.
5601	Out of everything that Ron was afraid of (even including Voldemort), spiders would top his list of fears.
5602	Out of the box integrations for services like Salesforce.
5603	Out to lead the Lady Maroons are veteran Tots Carlos, versatile setter Ayel Estranero and opposite spiker Justine Dorog.
5604	Over 100 jurors will be considered in the selection process.
5605	Over 30 days in August and September, the group, which Microsoft dubbed “Phosphorous,” made more than 2,700 attempts to identify consumer accounts, then attacked 241 of them.
5606	Over 50 brands were using dangerous levels of mercury in their fairness cream, state minister for climate change Zartaj Gul Wazir was quoted as saying by Geo News.
5607	Overall, decent bombard mission and some character development.
5608	Overall, the city has about 216 miles of public streets, according to the staff report.
5609	Overall there's a sophistication to the audio that matches the soundbar's equally stylish looks.
5610	Overconfident of their arithmetic, both failed to read the tea leaves and paid the price for it.
5611	Over Democrats voted in a meaningless primary (that cost the state $9 million), while only Democrats participated in the caucuses.
5612	Over half a kilometre tall, this towering financial centre looks big and brash – but it’s also expertly feng shui’d.
5613	Over sodas ahead of the debate, the two friends agree they haven’t decided whom they’d like to be the nominee.
5614	Over that time, the WPIAL has produced some of the most legendary players in football history like Joe Namath, Tony Dorsett, Joe Montana and Dan Marino.
5615	Over the decades that followed, the cycle would repeat.
5616	Over the Garden Wall: The Benevolent Sisters of CharityOver the Garden Wall: Circus Friendsdue out this October.
5617	Over the last seven days, Beam has traded down 26.8% against the US dollar.
5618	Over the last seven days, Counterparty has traded up 0.6% against the U.S. dollar.
5619	Over the last years, I watched from afar as he vowed to keep battling until his “dying breath.”
5620	Over the next four years, the community colleges must continue to meet the functional requirements of an accredited college, while the system office builds a centrally organized administration.
5621	“Over the past 4 years, CIOs have established themselves as members of the strategic leadership team.
5622	Over the past several months, the Brooklyn Park City Council recruited a handful affordable housing developers like Aeon to look at the property, Lunde said.
5623	Over the past week, the canal was thoroughly inspected by GID, GFLID and USBR personnel to identify potential problem areas, the release said.
5624	Over the same period, it thinks allocations by asset manager clients will grow to 20 percent from 9 percent.
5625	Over time, the organizations plan to enhance existing and develop new clinical services to meet the healthcare needs of the communities Rush serves.
5626	Owens said the idea of a lawsuit makes him sick, but Shane being in the locker room makes him even sicker.
5627	Owners of affected vehicles should notice an audible warning and error message in the dash that signals a malfunctioning passenger-side airbag.
5628	Owners of ChronoSync Express can start using these new features today with a free update!
5629	Owning your auto breakdown may be amongst the most annoying issues on earth.
5630	Page has vehemently denied meeting with either Sechin or Diveykin.
5631	Paid millions to play a game yet still are such miserable human beings.
5632	Painter’s record is not gushed over the way it is with some of his contemporaries.
5633	Pakistan condemns in the strongest possible terms, the heinous terrorist attack earlier today on two mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand, that resulted in loss of over 40 innocent lives, and critical injury to 20 others.
5634	Pakistan has an obligation to take action against terrorists and terror groups operating from its soil," he added.
5635	Pakistan’s opposition leader in the Parliament Shahbaz Sharif has recently drawn a comparison between Kashmir and Afghanistan and said, “What kind of a deal is this that the Afghans enjoy and celebrate peace in Kabul, but in Kashmir, blood is shed?
5636	Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas says “our hands remain extended in peace” on Israel’s Election Day.
5637	Palestinian Prime Minister Mohammad Shtayyeh gestures during an interview with Reuters in his office, Ramallah, West Bank, June 27, 2019.
5638	Palestinian woman shot dead at Qalandiyah checkpoint, Jerusalem, September 18, 2019.
5639	Pallbearers for Mrs. Ridenour will be her grandchildren.
5640	Palm Beach Sheriff Ric Bradshaw ordered an internal investigation be opened on Thursday to determine whether deputies assigned to monitor Epstein during his work release program violated any agency rules and regulations.
5641	Panasonic expects to report a decline in sales and group net profit for the first time in three years in the current fiscal year through next March.
5642	Pandit said that this is an excellent opportunity for Cúram.
5643	Pant's erratic shot selection has been under the scanner.’s attempts to wrap up a second successive T20 series win after the visitors prevailed by nine wickets in the third and final T20I at Bengaluru on Sunday.
5644	Paolo Perucchini, who heads one of those guilds, the Lombardy journalists association, praised the verdict as a demonstration that “information is valued in our country.”
5645	Paramedics and other first responders were called to Gabriola Island after the crash.
5646	Paramedics brought the victim to Brooklyn Hospital for treatment of a cut to his forehead from the airborne soft drink.
5647	Parenting has a huge spotlight on it and so for me it’s walking alongside them to make sure you’re supporting them, because ultimately that supports the kids.”
5648	Parents are the most popular people to travel to see, while one in six say they would go the distance to see their pet.
5649	Parnov quit his position as head of the pole vault program at the West Australia Institute of Sport soon after an investigation into allegations of inappropriate behaviour was launched.
5650	Participants were also able to enjoy a variety of entertainment acts such as spoken word, raffles, dance performances by Xpressions International Dance Group and musical performances by artists, Edward Byrd, Lomina Balawa, Terri Cann and Tamika Joy.
5651	Parties are made up of factions of patron-client relationships and this explains the tendency for them to splinter.
5652	Parties to labour disputes can engage in strike but there are ways and means that they are expected to take to make it lawful but they didn’t comply with that.
5653	Partisan registration, sex, race and age weights were created from the Tuesday, Sept. 10, 2019, update of the Florida Voter File to match the active registered voters in Florida.
5654	Partly cloudy, with a low around 75. Breezy, with an east northeast wind around 17 mph, with gusts as high as 24 mph.
5655	Partly sunny, with a high near 78. Northeast wind 7 to 9 mph.
5656	Partnerships between the ministry and the private sector which can leverage technology are equally important for extending government services, with Kenya’s government working closely with regional players like Safaricom.
5657	Parts of “Platform Singer Ranu Mondal” will be shot in Ranu’s hometown Ranaghat, while a few scenes will be shot in Mumbai, apart from a Kolkata studio.
5658	Part Three: Encourage Tech and high skill companies to invest in low-income neighborhoods to help close the skill gap.
5659	Passenger watchdog Transport Focus urged ScotRail to reconsider the move and said a "free-for-all dash for seats" must be avoided.
5660	Patapaa, on Wednesday paid a courtesy visit to Fadda Dickson, few weeks after he launched his maiden album with a massive concert at the Swedru Sports Stadium.
5661	Patel is hitting the ball all over the park.
5662	Paternal grandparents are Stephen and Karen Barton, also of Great Falls.
5663	Patrick has spent over a decade working in nearly every capacity in the nonprofit industry, for organizations of all shapes and sizes, and strives to ‘Do Good Better’ every day.
5664	Patriot Financial Group Insurance Agency LLC owned approximately 0.14% of Voyager Therapeutics worth $1,445,000 as of its most recent filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
5665	Pattinson and Stewart broke up in 2012 after photos surfaced of her making out with Snow White director Rupert Sanders.
5666	Paul and Karine finally arrived in Tonantins, Brazil after a five-day boat ride.
5667	Paula, they all said, was a lingering and restless soul.
5668	Paul is involved in other groups such as Junior Frontiers of the Mohawk Valley and Utica City Rocks Basketball Program.
5669	Paul Pogba ruled out until December as Manchester United boss Ole Gunnar Solskjaer confirms the extent of.
5670	Paul went on to obtain an Master of Science in Civil Engineering from the University of Maine with focuses in Structural and Geotechnical Engineering and was a graduate research assistant at the Advanced Structures and Composites Center.
5671	PAWS Pals Summer Camp registration opens on the P.A.W.S. website on April 20 at pawsadoption.
5672	Paying The Price Of Chinese Business ‘Partners’.
5673	PayPal said: ‘At PayPal, we carefully review accounts that are flagged to us for possible violations of our policies, as well as UK laws and regulations.
5674	Paytm had recently announced a $1-billion (around ₹7,173 crore) fund raise led by the US-based asset management firm T Rowe Price.
5675	Pc Alison Armitage, 29, was run down by a stolen car in March 2001.
5676	Peebles' work is a deeply theoretical look back in time and space at how the universe came to its current form, mostly filled with dark matter and dark energy we can't even see.
5677	Peele knows how to get under your skin and stay there, and it’s what made him the must-see horror filmmaker of the moment.
5678	Pekin lost its first three games this season, including a 31-20 setback to Dunlap in Week 3, but has roared back to win six in a row and earn a spot in the Class 7A state playoffs in addition to its Mid-Illini co-championship.
5679	Pelosi on Trump: "It's all about money"
5680	Pelzer joined Midwest Dairy in 1984 and has held various executive leadership roles.
5681	Pence says US-Canada relationship has 'never been stronger'
5682	Pendlebury said Collingwood's midfield group would spend more time worrying about executing their own plans than who de Boer attempts to put the clamps on.
5683	Penguin Coin (CURRENCY:PENG) traded up 10.9% against the U.S. dollar during the one day period ending at 17:00 PM E.T. on August 25th.
5684	Pentagon spokesman Jonathan Hoffman surprisingly attacked the primary point of the papers, that the Pentagon was misleading the public, and used that to dodge questions about whether the Pentagon would be more honest in the future.
5685	“People are seeing anecdotally that this plant is helping people,” he said.
5686	People at nearby Goongerah and Martins Creek have also been told to flee an out-of-control blaze burning easterly towards their communities.
5687	People from his society, just behind Takshshila complex, also helped.
5688	People look at the view from the 102nd floor observatory of the Empire State Building, in New York, Thursday, Oct. 10, 2019.
5689	People share things with their religious leaders that they don’t share with their closest friends, let alone their oncologist.
5690	People should declare their horniness on national television more often.
5691	“People tend to have a soft spot for celebrities, we see people stand in line for hours to catch a glimpse of their favorite star filming, or pay hundreds of dollars for a quick handshake and autograph at conventions.
5692	"People think when results are bad it's about motivation but they are professionals and they always try their best.
5693	People want to use this product should visit the official website of the manufacturer and complete the registration process.
5694	People who download large files often will save a lot of time, and we all know that files are getting bigger and bigger nowadays.
5695	People who have business with the courthouse will see a notice at the 120 E. Chesapeake Avenue location about the system failures and upcoming relocation scheduled for winter 2019 to 2020.
5696	People who operate with cruel intentions, who mask their agenda with a pretty convincing, shiny veneer.'
5697	People will get used to it, so will the world.
5698	"People will have the opportunity to express themselves in a different form of art, including physical art.
5699	People with type 1 diabetes aren’t able to produce their own insulin (and can’t regulate their blood sugar) because their body’s immune system is attacking the pancreas.
5700	People would stop by to take pictures with him.”
5701	Percy Tau is back from suspension.
5702	Perez, an ESPN analyst whose father, Tony, starred for the Big Red Machine teams of the 1970s and is enshrined in the Hall of Fame, was an intriguing, outside-the-box candidate to team officials, according to sources.
5703	Perez’s attorney, Chris Bergin, told reporters that he is hoping for a speedy decision after the hearing so that Perez won’t have to return to Mexico when the two weeks are up.
5704	Performances by the all-volunteer cast are July 11-13 and 16-20 and begin nightly at 9 p.m. There is seating provided for 8,000 guests.
5705	Perhaps only God and Sidney Hook could have answered that for us.
5706	Perhaps those who long-toil in opposition or on the government backbenches without the fanfare that accompanies being a premier or a senior cabinet minister are less familiar to you.
5707	Perhaps Trump was simply tired and wanted to go home, but that is not the impression he leaves behind.
5708	Perhaps we should look at intervals of movie as the separate entity, each utilizing tools you’ll need for a different expression of the ionic personalities.
5709	Perhaps Zimmerman will serenade the South Side Ballroom with his brilliant productions, “Right This Second” and “Infra Turbo Pigcart Racer.”
5710	Per Ken’s wishes, cremation has taken place with no memorial service planned.
5711	Perpetual Ltd owned approximately 0.07% of Equity Commonwealth worth $2,753,000 at the end of the most recent reporting period.
5712	PERRY, Georgia (41NBC/WMGT) – A longtime Houston County tradition continues this weekend.
5713	Personally luv KiDi, Ecool just got a new fan.
5714	Personal photographs with the player will not be allowed.
5715	Personnel from the Royal Bahamas Police Force remove a body recovered in a destroyed neighbourhood in the wake of Hurricane Dorian in Marsh Harbour, Great Abaco, Bahamas, September 9, 2019.
5716	PETA has been known, for a long time, as an organisation with a keen eye for what sells.
5717	Pete Fahlberg, a township supervisor, said his township is doing OK financially because it had some money set aside for emergencies.
5718	Peter Comeau’s squad earned five gold medals and a silver on the way to capturing the team race for the 10th time.
5719	Peter Gross, of RMRF, said the new lodge has been designed very efficiently, with 2,500 usable square feet on each of two floors.
5720	Petix said he believes an increase in truck traffic on the narrow Malinowski’s Hill is to blame for the rupture.
5721	PFDJ and IA are protected by well-fed, well dressed, well informed, well armed secrete services that is beholden to IA and only to him.
5722	Philadelphia (CW Philly) — The first round of Teen Choice Award nominations were announced on Wednesday, June 19, and CW shows received 33 nominations.
5723	Philip Coppel QC said: "Prior to 2010 it may have been the case that a debate between the Labour and the Conservative leaders would cover the full range of significant views in a general election.
5724	Phillips said the major’s yearlong required Capstone experience has also distinguished it from other majors.
5725	PHIPPSBURG, Maine — Percy’s Store, a landmark convenience store on Popham Beach in Phippsburg, has been demolished.
5726	Phoenix New Media Ltd (NYSE:FENG) saw a large decline in short interest in September.
5727	Photo by Garth Shanklin.
5728	Photograph of the CSK batsman showing his trousers stained with blood around the knee area is being viewed and commented upon on social media.
5729	Photos circulating on social media and carried by US media outlets showed a thick black plume of smoke billowing from the crash site.
5730	Photos: RC MYBURGH Evangelist Angus Buchan at Mighty Men in the Bushveld.
5731	Phyllis Chandler Williams, age 72, of Christiansburg, passed away on August 23, 2019.
5732	Pickens ran energy firms, hedge funds and wind farms, offering forecasts on oil prices and in 2008, when his fortune was estimated at $US3 billion by Forbes magazine, announced the Pickens Plan for an energy independent United States.
5733	Picton Mahoney Asset Management increased its stake in shares of Electronic Arts Inc. (NASDAQ:EA) by 57.1% in the second quarter, according to the company in its most recent 13F filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
5734	Pictured, Meghan in a mix of US and Italian designers at Wimbledon in July.
5735	Pierce went on to tell 13 News, “I said, ‘Then pull the trigger.
5736	Pierre Gagnaire’s exquisite food is served in a room so richly decorated it positively glows.
5737	Pinoni in 2017 that she thought his reporting might be linked to his disappearance.
5738	Pints are serious business in the UK.
5739	Pirates of the Caribbean, Will Turner struggles with his own coming of age, balancing the life he was raised into, colonialism and being honest and all that stuff, and the one he was born into.
5740	Pitcher Gerrit Cole talks with his wife Amy as he is introduced as the New York Yankees newest player during a baseball media availability, Wednesday, Dec. 18, 2019 in New York.
5741	Pitt athletic director Heather Lyke wrote to regulators and flagged "obligations or pressures to disseminate information about student-athlete injuries or playing status."
5742	Pitted against the F-15J, which plane would win?
5743	PITTSBURGH (KDKA)– The Rivers Casino celebrated the grand opening of the BetRivers Sportsbook– just in time for the Steelers vs. Bengals Monday night game.
5744	P.J. Fleck had a picture made of a third-down play from September 14th, saying it "shows what type of team we have."
5745	PKU prohibits the body from breaking down amino acid found in natural protein.
5746	Planet Lodge’s Executive Marketing and Events manager, Lesego Bile told Big Weekend both events are intended to officially introduce Planet Lodge as the go-to place to host events.
5747	Plank Road is a cute pizza place right down the street from FHC and across the street from Cookies and Cream.
5748	Plant-based diets (such as vegetarianism or veganism) though still in the minority, have garnered increasing popularity in recent years.
5749	Plan your route at the city's bike map website.
5750	Plaques, statues, signs and historical buildings play an important role in helping us learn about the rich histories of our states and cities.
5751	Plastic pollution: can the ocean really be cleaned up?
5752	Plateau’s eventual foray into artistic innovation was perhaps pre-determined : born in 1801, he was the son of an artist who specialized in painting flora and fauna.
5753	Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) is an autologous concentration of a high number of platelets in a small volume of plasma.
5754	Players come and go, you can be a fan of a club a lot longer than a player can play for a club," he told a Fox Sports podcast.
5755	Players needs to understand that, logically, Sam will not be able to bring his weight up a steep hill without keeping himself stable.
5756	Please consider supporting my patreon here – it’s keeping the lights on.
5757	Please contact you card issuer regarding this.
5758	Please continue to expose the realities of renewable energy technologies.
5759	Please FIFA visit your foundation and play by the rule of the game ”FAIR PLAY”.
5760	Please join me from 9 a.m. till noon.
5761	 PLEASE NOTE: Each applicant can ONLY apply for one programme at a time, either ICDF or MOFA.
5762	Please note that he doesn't own that production house, after Woh Lamhe when Kangana refused to do a film written by him called 'Dhokha where he wanted her to play a suicide bomber he got so upset that he not only shouted at her in his office.
5763	Please read carefully, all it says is that the Currys used to live in Orinda.
5764	PLISH staining for the Club cell marker (, red) and AT2 cell marker (, green) shows AT2 (Sftpc) cells.
5765	Plumes of smoke rising from a hillside northeast of Osoyoos around 9 a.m. Sunday morning.
5766	Plummer was 33 of 41, hooking up with David Bell nine times for 138 yards and two touchdowns.
5767	Plus, he noted, all donor kidneys in this study were eventually transplanted into someone -- which means they clearly were acceptable.
5768	Plus lots of cute dogs hanging out to meet & greet you.
5769	Plus, Passion Pit, Grizzly Bear, The Rapture, and Miike Snow.
5770	Plus, there's a sparkly, sizzling cameo from the always-fabulous Lizzo, so what's not to love?
5771	Point72 Asset Management L.P. bought a new stake in shares of Shenandoah Telecommunications in the second quarter valued at about $31,000.
5772	Point guard Manami Fujioka dribbles during a Japan women's national team practice at the National Training Center in Tokyo on Tuesday.
5773	Pointing out Turkey's agreements with these countries, Soylu said: "These agreements especially highlight their mutual extradition.”
5774	Pokemon Sword and Shield will feature new Pokemon like Sobble, a Water-type lizard that's continuously anxious all the time, and Yamper, an Electric-type corgi.
5775	Police and firefighters are inspecting a suspicious item found at a busy Eaton intersection.
5776	Police are asking anyone with information on this case to contact Detective Leyva at 786-224-9517 or Crime Stoppers at (305) 471-8477.
5777	Police are looking into whether the incidents are connected.
5778	Police arrested two men after viewing footage handed over by another holidaymaker.
5779	Police believe the perpetrators may have used a device like a sling-shot from another vehicle on the highway.
5780	Police closed the lane in the direction of Plieningen following the incident, creating significant traffic.
5781	Police collision investigators are seen on Stevenson Road South on Nov. 22, 2019 after a female cyclist was struck and killed.
5782	Police confirmed in a statement that an allegation had been made against Alexander and that the department's family violence unit was investigating.
5783	Police confirmed that the leader of the local militant group blamed for the attack, Mohamed Zahran, died in the suicide bombing at the Shangri-La Hotel.
5784	Police evacuated 15-20 people from the home where the shooting occurred, including men, women, children and at least one infant.
5785	Police had initially picked up the boatman and his assistant, aged 24 and 23, for questioning.
5786	Police, however, say they are attempting to address the issue by explaining the justice system processes to residents.
5787	Police in Indian-administered Kashmir fired tear gas on Tuesday as thousands of students protested for a second day over the alleged rape of a three-year-old child.
5788	Police in the capital estimated 4,000 people had taken part.
5789	Police outriders regularly accompany the President of Malta and, on certain occasions, even the Prime Minister.
5790	Police questioned a Christchurch native - who they believe to be a witch doctor - over the deaths.
5791	Police raid NSW homes over NZ shootingsnews.
5792	Police reported the man was on the back porch clothed, but was carrying on.
5793	Police said the seven-seater Toyota Land Cruiser 'seemed to have turned on the bridge' and went on top of the railings before falling 25ft on to a riverbed below.
5794	Police say Sherene Rizk, 44, was involved in planning the home invasion.
5795	Police say that it is possible that the shooting took place in nearby John Tabor Park.
5796	Police say the 68-year-old South Australian man was skiing with friends when he hit the tree around 10.15am on Saturday.
5797	Police say the mother, who was pushing the stroller, was unharmed.
5798	Police say the robber was inside the check cashing store for a total of three or four minutes.
5799	Police say they were unable to locate the suspect after making multiple attempts to find them.
5800	Police sources told French press the man first killed his supervisor, whom he had been “in conflict” with, before killing three male officers with a ceramic knife.
5801	Police spokesman Abdullahi Haruna, who confirmed the incident, said: ‘’ Immediately the case was reported to the police, the Commissioner, Ahmed Iliyasu, ordered a discreet investigation to unravel the circumstances that led to the incident.
5802	Police suspect that a personal dispute escalating out of control had led to the clash and subsequent stabbing.
5803	Police today confirmed a suspect in their investigation had left the country.
5804	Policymakers have, however, been studying possible reforms to the ferries for years, without reaching consensus.
5805	Political cynicism is being displayed by voters on all sides.
5806	Pollock is a player, when healthy, that can be an anchor in a team’s lineup.
5807	Polls and referenda show Wisconsinites are warming to the idea of legalizing marijuana for medical or recreational use.
5808	Polls show that this kind of enthusiasm is common among young voters, and studies suggest that, if nurtured, this eagerness to participate can transfer into a lifetime of civic engagement.
5809	Polls show there are smarter ways for Democrats to hold Trump accountable.
5810	"Polytechnics are too scared to speak out as there are clauses stating that during the 2 to 3 year establishment phase, it is actually the Minister who will have final sign off on their cash grab reserves.
5811	Pompeo and Lai discussed Hong Kong’s autonomy under the “one country, two systems” framework and recent anti- protests, according to a by the U.S. Department of State spokesperson Morgan Ortagus.
5812	Pompeo said Iran “promised” on April 22 to disrupt oil shipping from the Strait of Hormuz.
5813	Pomphret still denied premediated murder, instead claiming a 'special defence' and blaming his wife's behaviour for a temporary loss of control.
5814	Pope Francis and Cardinal Sepe hold relic of St. Januarius' blood in Naples cathedral March 21, 2015.
5815	Popular Nollywood actress, Yvonne Jegede has shared a hilarious post asking men whose advances she refused earlier to come and try reshooting their shot.
5816	Porcher has appeared in five games this season.
5817	Posters featuring the painting were put up by the AfD’s Berlin branch with the slogan “So that Europe won’t become Eurabia”.
5818	Potential damaging to the environment.
5819	POUNDSTONE: We here at Pebble Beach are introducing defense into golf.
5820	Practice rounds were suspended for several hours and the course was evacuated because of storms at Augusta National in the lead up to the 2019 Masters.
5821	Practices that commit to learning.
5822	Pratik Jain, Partner and National Leader— Indirect Taxes, PwC India observes: “E-way bill has been a happy story so far.
5823	Precisely that makes us overlook their massive rent-seeking.
5824	Premedicate prior to each CYRAMZA infusion.
5825	Preparing for a marathon as steps on a long path to a closer relationship.
5826	PrEP (pre-exposure prophylaxis) became available in 2012.
5827	Presenting the exhibition in Milan, Wintour expressed her gratitude for Lagerfeld, whom she described as a “great friend and an important donor,” her voice cracking as she spoke.
5828	“Preserving the original creative intent of the hardworking people who make shows like is a top priority, and we know it enhances your viewing—and listening—experience for many more moments of joy,” Netflix said.
5829	President Akufo-Addo told the congregation that he trusts in God and strongly believes that his coming to power was by God’s grace and so “trust that the battle is still the Lord’s and I will deliver all promises made to Ghanaians in 2016 to His glory”.
5830	President Buhari’s victory in the 2019 presidential election was upheld by tribunal after it dismissed the petition filed by Alhaji Atiku Abubakar and the People’s Democratic Party (PDP).
5831	President Calvin Coolidge made Craters of the Moon a national monument in 1924 by signing a proclamation.
5832	President Cyril Ramaphosa on Wednesday announced a five-point emergency plan to put a halt to gender-based violence during an extraordinary joint sitting of Parliament.
5833	President Donald Trump has repeatedly urged the Fed to lower rates, claiming in a post on Twitter that the central bank "has made all of the wrong moves."
5834	President Donald Trump signed legislation into law Wednesday that shows American support for Hong Kong protesters in a move that will likely worsen relations with China.
5835	President Muhammadu Buhari on Wednesday, September 11 presided over the Federal Executive Council meeting (FEC), amidst the tribunal ruling on the February 23 presidential election.
5836	President Muhammadu Buhari recently approved the recruitment for NDLEA to beef-up the strength of the agency.
5837	President Muhammadu was among the mourners as a shell-shocked nation wondered why people are wasted in a preventable orgy of blood-letting.
5838	President Obama confronted by similar circumstances, distanced himself from his pastor, Rev. Jeremiah Wright for the latter’s offensive and divisive sermons.
5839	President Peter Mutharika has advised opposition leader and other stake holders who want to meet him in regards to the political situation in the country to set the agenda.
5840	President Trump, on the other hand, has spoken about the issue on Twitter and at his rallies numerous times, largely in irreverent tones.
5841	President, why does the American media hate your Country so much?”
5842	Press conferences tend to house their fair share of physical skirmishes, yet that doesn't make those incidents exclusive.
5843	Pressure eventually had to to tell and Aguero made no mistake when presented with another chance in the 70th minute, firing Walker’s cut-back through McCarthy’s legs.
5844	Pressure for the coach?
5845	Prime Minister Justin Trudeau makes his way back to a cabinet meeting after voting in the House of Commons on Parliament Hill in Ottawa on April 9, 2019.
5846	Prime Minister Nagamootoo’s instruction to the Board to reverse its dismissal of Duncan almost immediately sparked off the of Board Chair, Geeta Chandan-Edmond and directors, Mervyn Williams and Hilbert Foster.
5847	Prince Abiodun said unity and peace more than anything else should be the major concern of all Muslims and all overs of the will of God at the point in the nation’s history.
5848	Prince Charles is flying back to Britain to face his beleaguered brother Prince Andrew after his nine-day royal tour 10,000 miles ended today.
5849	Prince Charles "read the riot act" to his shamed brother Prince Andrew after dragging him to Sandringham for a showdown.
5850	Prince William and his wife Kate, the Duchess of Cambridge, will visit Pakistan next week in what Kensington Palace has described as the most complex tour undertaken by the couple, given the security and logistical issues.
5851	Principal at Laerskool Randhart Marlene Gerber, 12-year-old Danielle Theart and marketing and fund-raising manager at Stepping Stone Hospice Marietjie Tame.
5852	Prior to Friday night, the unbeaten, top-ranked Fort Smith Northside Lady Bears had had just two games in which they won by less than double digits in 12 contests.
5853	Prior to republican cease-fires, the early 1990s in Ireland were operationally demanding and I quickly gained experience commanding armed operations in support of An Garda Síochána.
5854	Prior to that he ran a fighting second to Dulette on heavy ground at Rosehill over 1400m.
5855	Privacy Checkup also allows you to see which apps and websites you have linked to your Facebook account.
5856	Probably depends on how nice the car is.
5857	Probably everything that happens in our mind there's a version of that happens in a nonhuman mind.
5858	“Probably I should have stayed in Colombia.
5859	Processes to re-establish the North West Provincial Council on AIDS (PCA) before the end of the year are ongoing, said the North West Department of Health.
5860	Producers of the Fox television drama have supported Smollett, saying his character on “Empire,” James Lyon, was not being written off the show.
5861	Producers took a shot on us and we did not expect to be successful.
5862	Professional nurses also oversee the job of nursing assistants in several settings.
5863	Professor Dershowitz functioned at one point as Jeffrey Epstein’s lawyer.
5864	Professor Hickey notes that women make up almost half of the workforce in Australia and two-thirds of the voluntary sector.
5865	Professor Mireku who is President's nominee together with other members, promised to bring to an end to the nagging impasse at the university over the non-existence of a governing council.
5866	Professor Philip Ebow Bondzi-Simpson, Rector, GIMPA in his address, advised the students to respect the rules and regulations of the institute, adhere to its values, excellence, distinctiveness and sustainability.
5867	Prof Hoegh-Guldberg reiterated the importance of the coming year (2020) in terms of climate action and the opportunity to strengthen emission reduction pledges in line with the Paris Agreement of 2015.
5868	Profit was cut in half at oilfield services giant Baker Hughes in the first quarter despite at rise in revenues.
5869	Progress with gender equality has also been slower than expected, and a fifth of women in the world experienced physical or sexual violence in the past year.
5870	Project HOPE is a nonprofit organization with locations in Findlay and Bowling Green.
5871	Project OWL stands for Outdoor Wonders and Learning.
5872	“Prominence Health Plan puts accessible health care at the forefront of Northern Nevada by providing a robust provider network and unparalleled resources for Medicare Advantage members,” said Kamal Jemmoua, CEO for Prominence Health Plan.
5873	Propane carriers faced four- to six-hour waits last week at the Conway, Kansas, propane terminal that is the nation’s second-largest, and drivers were facing restrictions due to the wait, one official said.
5874	ProPublica appears to have found another one.
5875	Prosecutors noted that a grand jury is already investigating the death.
5876	Prosecutors said they still don’t know why Barry was in the area, though his car was found on Interstate 5 about a mile away from the home.
5877	Prosthetics pricing varies greatly depending on a person’s needs, but a prosthetic leg can cost up to $50,000, according to the Alliance of Advanced Biomedical Engineering, a community of professionals in the biomedical field.
5878	Protesters held aloft placards with slogans including “Free Hong Kong!” and “Democracy now!”
5879	Protests have erupted in college campuses in many parts of the country over the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, which makes it easier for non-Muslims from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh to become Indian citizens.
5880	PROVIDENCE, R.I. (AP) — Rhode Island Gov. Gina Raimondo has lowered estimated revenues from the state’s truck toll system by $34 million.
5881	Pruitt turned out to be just as ineffective as a self-declared coal industry lobbyist as he had been cloaked as the ostensible administrator of environmental protection – his coal bailouts keep going down in flames.
5882	Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio lifted its stake in AMERCO (NASDAQ:UHAL) by 21.2% in the second quarter, according to its most recent Form 13F filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
5883	Pundi X (NPXS) traded 3.5% lower against the dollar and now trades at $0.0008 or 0.00000011 BTC.
5884	Purchase only those detectors bearing the seal of Underwriters Laboratory (UL).
5885	Purdue: The Boilermakers made it hard for Ohio to get many good looks in the first half and held off a surge to beat the Mid-American Conference team for the second straight December.
5886	PUTRAJAYA: According to laboratory test results, the main cause of the deaths of 16 Orang Asli at Kuala Koh, Kelantan is measles, not metal poisoning as alleged.
5887	Q4 -Rules need to be incrementally/ carefully introduced and regional councils will need to define some local solutions.
5888	Qatar promised more reforms to its labour laws ahead of the 2022 World Cup.
5889	QPR made their only FA Cup final in 1982 where they lost to Spurs in a replay settled by a Glenn Hoddle strike.
5890	Q. Re: Bisexual dad: Are these two really prejudiced?
5891	Quadre, Nigeria’s No. 1 junior player, outclassed her compatriot adding the J5 Abuja title to the Megrine and Cotonou titles, she won in April and September, respectively.
5892	Quality is better than quantity when it comes to using your vacation.
5893	Quant (QNT) traded 4.9% lower against the dollar and now trades at $1.91 or 0.00053290 BTC.
5894	Quantum Realm plays a crucial role in Avengers: Endgame.
5895	Quarterback Michael Starbuck’s usual pinpoint passing had to battle fierce end-to-end wind.
5896	Qubitica (QBIT) traded 6% higher against the dollar and now trades at $64.36 or 0.00518544 BTC.
5897	Quezon’s humanitarian gesture was honored in 2009 with the “Open Doors” monument in Israel, located at Rishon LeZion Memorial Park just off Tel Aviv.
5898	Quinday went missing Thursday afternoon.
5899	Quite apart from creating the world's most famous detective, he was a sportsman, lecturer, campaigner and world traveller.
5900	Qureiris denied the accusations and said that Saudi authorities obtained his confessions under duress.
5901	Q: You've advised both Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders on their wealth tax proposals.
5902	Racing NSW chief Peter V'landys is set to take the ARLC chairman position.
5903	Raiden Network Token has a market cap of $9.75 million and $556,970.00 worth of Raiden Network Token was traded on exchanges in the last 24 hours.
5904	Raiders rookie RB Josh Jacobs sits behind Murray at +250, but after another strong outing a Week 7 loss to the Packers, Jacobs has every opportunity to spoil the party.
5905	Railways RRB NTPC 2019: Over 1.26 crore applied for 35,208 vacancieshttps://indianexpress.
5906	Raising three children without the support of their fathers was tasking for a woman who was never sure of where her next meal will come from, she insisted begging was not an option.
5907	Rajan said the group is working with landscape architect Rusty Schmidt, who founded a group called Long Island Native Plant Initiative.
5908	Rajinikanth's first look of his next movie Darbar has been praised by well-known celebrities from South India.
5909	Rakhi tied the knot last weekend to an NRI, reported Spotboye.
5910	Ralph Hasenhüttl may endure a long night of the soul as he considers what a full-strength team could do to his side.
5911	Ramli was all set to open a consular office in Montreal on Oct. 1, after having received his credentials from Ottawa in August.
5912	Rams - they unfortunately have a tough upcoming schedule as well in the Ravens ( L), Seahawks (L), Cowboys (L), 49ers (L).
5913	Randall Cobb allowed Devin McCourty to punch the ball free on a play where everyone in the stadium except for Cobb knew that the punch was coming.
5914	Randle had something to say about the comparison — and it’s a pretty good burn.
5915	Rangers: At Ottawa on Friday night.
5916	RAPID CITY, S.D. (AP) – A father has pleaded not guilty to involuntary manslaughter in federal court in South Dakota after he was accused of smothering his baby while the two slept together.
5917	“Rapidly changing technology is providing historic opportunity to transform our daily lives from the way payments are made to shaping the customer’s ability to access credit from financial institutions.
5918	Raptor said there was no evidence that the estate was involved and the estate itself appealed for information.
5919	Rashod Bateman grieved the loss of an uncle and then had a big season opener in his memory.
5920	Rather, between XP engrams or event engrams, and dust you got from dismantling unwanted items, you could either get pretty much everything you wanted randomly, and mop up the rest with Bright Dust purchase easily.
5921	“Rather than persuade the CJN to step aside even if without resigning if he thought he was right, the SAN’s decided to dig in and chose to rely on procedure and not substance.
5922	Rather than tell my fiancée I’d made a mistake, that was my brilliant plan to try and get out of the wedding.
5923	Rather, the Scheme permits the use of white hijab which must not be more than shoulder length and must be tucked into the uniform.
5924	Rational Advisors LLC increased its stake in shares of Marriott International by 373.9% during the second quarter.
5925	Raymond James lowered Cloudera from an “outperform” rating to a “market perform” rating in a research note on Thursday, June 6th.
5926	Raymond James Trust N.A. now owns 15,803 shares of the specialty chemicals company’s stock worth $917,000 after purchasing an additional 263 shares during the period.
5927	RBI appointed R Subramaniakumar, former managing director and chief executive of Indian Overseas Bank, as the administrator for DHFL.
5928	RCMP said Tuesday the teens from Vancouver Island were seen in Meadow Lake, Sask., on Sunday – police have photos of them taken by a store camera.
5929	R&D tax credits (RDTCs) allow UK companies to reduce their tax bill or receive a payable cash credit based on a portion of their R&D expenditure.
5930	Read the AOC PLUS 3 statements on their hatred of Jews and Israel.
5931	“Real Estate continues to have a strong year, selling double the number of rural acres that we expected as well as closing a commercial real estate transaction in Chenal Valley during the third quarter.
5932	Realising this gap, Mumbai Fintech Hub launched the where fintech startups can apply, get funded and get connected with corporates to solve their specific use cases.
5933	Really, time will only tell.
5934	Real Valladolid have closed the transfer talks on want-away Ghanaian defender Mohammed Salisu, GHANAsoccernet.com can exclusively report.
5935	• Reasons To Stay Alive by Andy Burrows and Matt Haig is available now.
5936	Receive News & Ratings for FTI Consulting Daily - Enter your email address below to receive a concise daily summary of the latest news and analysts' ratings for FTI Consulting and related companies with MarketBeat.
5937	Receive News & Ratings for Gocompare.
5938	Receive News & Ratings for Surface Oncology Daily - Enter your email address below to receive a concise daily summary of the latest news and analysts' ratings for Surface Oncology and related companies with MarketBeat.
5939	Receive News & Ratings for Tuesday Morning Daily - Enter your email address below to receive a concise daily summary of the latest news and analysts' ratings for Tuesday Morning and related companies with MarketBeat.
5940	Receive News & Updates for Bitnation Daily - Enter your email address below to receive a concise daily summary of the latest news and updates for Bitnation and related cryptocurrencies with MarketBeat.
5941	Receive the latest and greatest in women's health and wellness from EmpowHER - for free!
5942	Recently, Cosby gave his first since beginning to serve his 3-to-10-year sentence in a maximum security penitentiary in Pennsylvania.
5943	Recently restored and re-released in celebration of its 50th anniversary, 'Doctor Zhivago' has come to be regarded as one of cinema’s greatest love stories.
5944	Recently, the House passed a spending bill that included $2.5 million for the SafeSport Center.
5945	Recidivism impacts communities of color disproportionately, according to prisonscholars.org. The website said recidivism can result in intergenerational poverty and economic mobility, and it impacts the community.
5946	Re: "College debt help a new work perk -- In competitive market, area firms seek to lower stress, hike productivity," May 5 news story.
5947	Recruited heavily for football, Jackson accepted a scholarship to Arizona State University.
5948	ReddCoin (RDD) traded 0.4% lower against the dollar and now trades at $0.0010 or 0.00000012 BTC.
5949	Reeves hopes to major in film and one day become an Academy Award-winning documentarian.
5950	Refoulement occurs not only when a refugee is directly rejected or expelled, but also when indirect pressure is so intense that it leads people to believe that they have no option but to return to a country where they face a serious risk of harm.
5951	Refs can keep him from playing with it on.
5952	Regarding the India launch, Disney has not officially confirmed any date.
5953	Regardless of what’s going on, they prepare the right way and they’re ready to come out here and go to work.
5954	Regardless, the restaurant's late hours are catnip for hungry college students in need of sustenance.
5955	Related posts: AMHVoices: Youth must question gender, age dynamics in politicsMobile technology enables free discussions among young people!
5956	Relatives of members of the Lead Through Scholarship committee are not eligible to receive this scholarship.
5957	Remarkably, the 2020 pre-budget strategy paper embraces EITI.
5958	Renaissance Technologies LLC lifted its holdings in Revance Therapeutics by 47.5% during the second quarter.
5959	Renée Zellweger is one of the most cherished and respected actors in modern cinema.
5960	"Renewable energy in our health care will require robust support and joint effort to be sustainable and it is important that there should be an understanding of the installation process and maintenance," she said.
5961	Renewing the operations levy, Proposition 1, helps bridge the gaps in state funding, along with helping to provide for everyday basics like instructional materials, staff salaries and textbooks.
5962	Ren (REN) traded up 35.1% against the dollar and now trades at $0.11 or 0.00001056 BTC.
5963	Renting In Pittsburgh: What Will $800 Get You?
5964	Rep. Louie Gohmert was complaining during a hearing about two articles of impeachment that Democrats have blocked attempts to call fact witnesses who didn't support their arguments.
5965	Reports of heavy snowfall was also received from high altitude areas of the Jammu region, including Ramban, Udhampur, Bhaderwah, Doda, Kishtwar, Poonch, Rajouri, Reasi and Kathua districts.
5966	Reports of violence, killings, snatching of ballot boxes and intimidation of voters seem to have marred the ongoing governorship polls in Bayelsa state.
5967	Representative Matt Gaetz, Republican of Florida, questioned Hunter Biden’s experience.
5968	Republican and Democratic leaders of the U.S. Congress, who have criticized Trump for abandoning the Kurds, have announced plans for legislation to impose sanctions.
5969	Republicans denounced the vote.
5970	Rescue workers in a helicopter search a flooded area after a dam collapsed in Brumadinho, Brazil, Sunday, Jan.
5971	Researchers say these results establish that brain anatomy varies significantly in dogs, likely due to human-applied selection for behaviour.
5972	Researchers used past Hubble data to examine the spectral signature of light shining from K2-18 b’s sun through its atmosphere.
5973	Residents in suburban Gurnee are bracing for bad news this week as the Des Plaines River continues to rise after recent heavy rains.
5974	Residents use 10 to 15 per cent of the water drawn from the dam.
5975	Respirators were used to give the girls miniature puffs of air to keep them breathing.
5976	Responding to News24's report on Friday afternoon, the EFF leader said he called "reluctantly" because he believed News24 on Public Enterprise Minister Pravin Gordhan and Van Loggerenberg's "side".
5977	Results such as this have some in the scientific community questioning the effectiveness of chimera experiments.
5978	Resume templates really are great because they enable you to earn skilled and beautiful resume.
5979	Resume templates really are great since they enable you to earn amazing and professional resume.
5980	Retail Detail is an ongoing partnership operation involving officers from multiple units and retailers in an effort to prevent and discourage theft.
5981	Retrieved on January 29, 2019, from https://blogs.
5982	Review copies are available upon request to members of the press.
5983	Reviewing the original Signature production in 1995, Vincent Canby called it “tough, one of Mr. Foote’s most serious and scathing works.”
5984	Revolheart, an organization promoting women in combat sports, had a booth at the event and informed attendees about the work it does in providing equity for women in sports.
5985	Rhinelander Trig's store manager Don Theisen reacts after learning he won a second award from the Wisconsin Grocers Association.
5986	Rhodes became the first openly gay delegate to the Democratic National Convention in 1988.
5987	Rhumbline Advisers increased its holdings in shares of National Commerce by 35.3% during the second quarter.
5988	Rice had HOF players helping him, Young/Montana, T.O.,Rodger Craig, great o lines and top defences.
5989	Richardson was signed by the Arizona Cardinals as a free agent.
5990	Rich Paul and I were part of succeeding in the manner they can understand, and they'll understand when I say this, you are either all the way in, or all the way out, and there is no in between."
5991	Richter accelerates the end, the bloodthirsty fiends receive an angry Miles, and those pulling for his underdog are given hope.
5992	Riders handed out pamphlets to drivers, which detailed their push for the government to act on climate change.
5993	Riedel says he also initially underestimated the seasonal demand for fish.
5994	“Riggon was only 17 when he was caught, a child, for whatever reason, caught up in a dangerous world of drug dealing and violence.
5995	Right from delivering support to the Android devices or the iOS ones, Sling TV is the better option.
5996	Right now, we have 116,000 jobs to be filled.”
5997	Right now we’re in a warm interglacial period, having come out of the last ice age (when New York City and Chicago were under an ice sheet) about 12,000 years ago.
5998	Righttime provides on-site x-rays, laboratory testing, concussion care, patient portal, and works with patients' primary care providers and specialists through secure electronic medical records.
5999	Right-to-work laws prohibit union contracts from requiring all workers to either join a union or pay dues.
6000	Rigid attendance policies may continue to affect the attitude and mindset of students even beyond the academic sphere.
6001	Rinier struggled to function.
6002	Rinne said his party disagreed with the Finns party on immigration, the EU, and economic policy, as well as, most importantly, in their core values.
6003	Rising risk appetite tarnished gold’s appeal, pushing spot gold down 0.16% to $1,491.65 per ounce.
6004	Rising sea levels would cause people to abandon parts of Mumbai, Jakarta, Guangzhou, Hong Kong, Ho Chi Minh City, Shanghai, Bangkok and Manila, among other cities.
6005	Risk factors include family history, diabetes, smoking and untreated chronic stress.
6006	Ristevski gave a small nod to the judge as he was taken away.
6007	River levels in the Mississippi are perilously, frighteningly high — and at the gates of the Morganza Spillway the water is only a few feet from overtopping the facility.
6008	Rivers State Council of Traditional Rulers has urged the Independent National Electoral Commission ( INEC) …
6009	Rizvi has the potential to rival Larsen, she but she needs to embody confidence, be concise, and have a concrete plan.
6010	R KELLY'S CONTROVERSY Who is R Kelly, when was the singer married to Aaliyah and who has accused him of having a ‘one-man sex cult’?
6011	RMIT professor of urban policy Jago Dodson said that under these population projections the Wyndham municipality, which takes in Werribee, will have a population in 2036, equivalent to that of Tasmania.
6012	RNA structures are also “floppier,” Gilman adds, making them harder for molecules to bind to.
6013	Robeco Institutional Asset Management B.V. Buys New Stake in Entercom Communications Corp.
6014	Roberto Osuna closed the game out in the ninth, and when he struck out Choi to end the series, Cole led the charge out of the Astros dugout to celebrate, wrapping Osuna in a bear hug.
6015	Robert Pattinson will play the Caped Crusader in the new film, due out in 2021.
6016	Rock samples are being taken where anomalous XRF readings along with geological observations suggest it is warranted.
6017	Rodman revealed that he immediately hopped on a private jet that Madonna sent so he could have sex with her, then immediately flew back to Vegas to the casinos so he could go back to his gambling.
6018	Rodriguez had tipped off The Verge of the security flaw in iOS 7 back then.
6019	Rogers said he thinks people at INN “do a good job” but “it’s just that there is an agenda” that determines what they cover.
6020	Rohac: I suppose there’s nothing wrong with it as a general proposition.
6021	Rolland said her research over the years has focused on developing ways to figure out whether human activities such as fishing, noise in the ocean and construction of wind farms are affecting whales' health.
6022	Rome wasn't built in a day.
6023	Ronnie and Ryan were informed on Sunday December 1 that they would be required to assist thousands of other engineers from across the UK to help restore supplies in Falkirk, so they packed their bags and left on Monday morning.
6024	Ronquist said the merger realizes savings by producing fewer print pages.
6025	Rooke says some people do repeat the program—it’s held twice a year—with greater value each time.
6026	Rookie Eloy Jiménez hit a two-run homer in the second inning off Keller (3-8), who worked eight innings, allowing two runs on five hits, with one walk and four strikeouts.
6027	Root’s personal battle with Kuldeep Yadav will be a pivotal one with the young wrist-spinner being one of India’s biggest wicket-taking threat.
6028	Rorvig served on the NDSA Budget Committee, was a District 1 director and the vice chairman and chairman of the NDSA Ag Policy Committee before assuming the NDSA’s top post.
6029	Roseau River Chapter of the Minnesota Deer Hunters Association, 5:30 p.m., Roseau Civic Center, 121 Center St. E., Roseau, Minn.
6030	Roselyn O’Connell from Arizona said, “I’m looking for bold ideas about climate change that can really work.”
6031	Roth Capital set a $75.00 price target on shares of First Solar and gave the company a “buy” rating in a report on Thursday, June 13th.
6032	Roughly one percent of my domain portfolio contains domains with hyphens.
6033	Round implants are popular and are usually chosen by women who want a lift, fullness, and cleavage, and the teardrop-shaped implants are chosen to give a more natural look to the breasts.
6034	Rounding out the top 10 were Captain Shreve’s Olivia Hilburn, West Monroe’s Riley Hall, Natchitoches Central’s Aaniyah Hardwell, Haughton’s Lowrey Lain and Byrd’s Bryn Peters.
6035	Routine is important when it comes to teaching your brain to switch off at night.
6036	Routine vaccination of the American public was stopped in 1972 after the disease was eradicated in the U.S. and, as a result, a large proportion of the U.S., as well as the global population has no immunity,” said Peter Marks, M.D., Ph.
6037	Rowan Rheingans: Dispatches on the Red Dress – an intimate and adventurous exploration of memory, identity, joy, sorrow, trauma-recovery, bird-song, war and waltzes.
6038	ROXBURY — New Jersey 101.5's own Bob Williams is recovering after receiving a crucial kidney transplant, thanks to longtime neighborhood acquaintance turned kidney donor, Kim Roumes.
6039	Royal Bank of Canada reissued a “buy” rating on shares of Alphabet in a report on Tuesday, April 30th.
6040	Roy starred as an opener during England's triumphant Cricket World Cup campaign earlier this summer but question marks remain over his ability in the Test arena.
6041	Roz likes to buffet the naive Molly.
6042	RSVP is designed to provide further information about EDP-938 in a community acquired RSV adult population and to better understand the feasibility of DAA therapy in an outpatient setting.
6043	Rubbertown is an area along the Ohio River that has a lot of industrial rubber plants that were erected during World War II.
6044	Ruby's race team was comprised of Clayton Lantz, Kenneth Schley and James Rath.
6045	Rummana Hussain is an assistant metro editor at the Sun-Times.
6046	Rumor has it that she’s more open to one night stands too.
6047	Rumors about a possible romantic spark between Drake and Jenner started when the beauty mogul attended the rapper’s 33rd birthday party a couple weeks ago.
6048	Running back David Montgomery, whom the Bears drafted in the third round of last weekend’s NFL Draft, will wear number 32 on his jersey for the coming year.
6049	Running solely on donations, the organization aims to give children gifts under the tree and a Christmas dinner.
6050	“Rus in vrede Nico (rest in peace Nico), a WhatsApp status of another Norkem SAPS officer read.
6051	Russell Lepage said he signed his contract with a solar panel provider on Thursday morning, just an hour before the program was put on hold.
6052	Russell Williams had recently received a housing voucher but because you only have 60 days to find housing, he was not able to find a place in time.
6053	Russia and Africa have to make efforts for raising the level of trade and business in both regions.
6054	Russia () are the only other country ETFs that made new 52-week highs when the S&P did the same.
6055	Russian feminist, protest-punk-group have announced a 19-date 2020 North American tour partially benefiting ; the activist group is scheduled to perform in Houston at White Oak Music Hall as a part of this tour on April 10.
6056	Ruth was preceded in death by her parents, sister Helen, husband Glen, and son Jeffrey.
6057	RYAN, 35, HAS always preferred the scavenged and handcrafted to the glossily manufactured.
6058	Ryan Russell, a former student of mine who now works in broadcasting, confirms what I’ve seen reported elsewhere: the clocks are connected directly into the broadcast, so what you see in the stadium is what you see on TV.
6059	Saaho actor Shraddha Kapoor: Prabhas is all hearthttps://indianexpress.
6060	Sadie Voss had 13 kills for the Huskies, went 6-of-7 serving with two aces, and had a block.
6061	Sadly, horrible news is headed Kim and Drew’s way.
6062	Safety profiles in all cohorts were consistent with the IV administration of DARZALEX in combination with these regimens.
6063	Said Annie Peter, brand manager for Shell Rotella North America.
6064	Said they always have a lot of fun trying to come up with clever sayings against speeding and DUI, that kinda stuff.
6065	Saint-Maximin picking up the most fines is no surprise, he was always billed as a trouble maker before he even joined Newcastle.
6066	Sales in the store help fund the Thrift Store food bank.
6067	Sales volume this Diwali is likely to be 10 per cent lower than what we saw last year,” said Rajendra Shah from Harsh Trading Company in Mumbai and an office-bearer of the Mumbai Dry Fruits and Dates Merchants Association.
6068	Sally just thought she was being a snob.
6069	Samael climbed up the cage and clenched the barbwire to steady himself and came down with a top rope ax handle on Ross.
6070	Samaritans are available 24 hours a day, every day, on telephone number 116 123.
6071	Same Price Cash or Credit.
6072	Samir Madani, who runs the TankerTrackers.
6073	Sampling both malignant and benign lesions allowed the researchers to distinguish methylation differences between the two groups.
6074	Samsung will finally be up for the showdown with four smartphones up its sleeves.
6075	Sam Totten, a first-year criminology and psychology major, volunteered with Special Olympics in high school.
6076	Samuel Petrequin contributed to this report.
6077	Samuelsen said the company asked its neighbours, including other industrial sites and the nearby San Jacinto Texas State Historic Site, to shelter in place.
6078	Sanchez has struggled with injuries the past two seasons, while Stroman the subject of multiple trade rumors this offseason.
6079	Sandcastles do not build themselves; these constructions take collaboration, cooperation and coordination.
6080	Sanders caught five of the six wobbly passes that Flacco sent his way for 60 yards.
6081	Sanders was appointed to the acting CBP post in April, after then-commissioner Kevin McAleenan was made acting Secretary of Homeland Security.
6082	San Francisco has a lot to polish up after committing three turnovers, dropping a handful of passes, giving up five sacks and missing a potential game-winning field goal in overtime of the heartbreaking 27-24 loss to Russell Wilson and the Seahawks.
6083	SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico (AP) — Puerto Rico Supreme Court agrees to see lawsuit filed by Senate seeking to oust veteran politician sworn in as governor.
6084	San Luis in turn has four loses, one win, in their last five battles.
6085	San Miguel is expected to make major adjustments in the hours leading up to Friday’s Game 2 but maintaining its signature brand of defense may again lead to better things for Magnolia on the other end.
6086	Santa Clara County is home to Stanford University, an institution that has become synonymous with the high-tech and innovation economy of Silicon Valley.
6087	Santa Claus is coming to town at floor, on 24 December 2019.
6088	Sarfraz goes berserk with Amir.
6089	Sarine is one of many filmmakers eagerly awaiting the start of this year’s Sunscreen Film Festival West, which runs Friday through Sunday at the Hermosa Beach Community Center.
6090	Sarthak Gupta is one of those who is experimenting with black food, not making it but eating it.
6091	Satellite image of bushfires near Yamba and Mt Hyland, NSW, on 8 September.
6092	“Satellites work, but they aren’t perfect.
6093	Saturday, November 9th 2:00 p.m. – Sunday, November 10th 3:00 p.m.
6094	Saturday will start with some sunshine, but clouds will increase during the afternoon as a storm system moves out of the Rocky Mountains and onto the plains.
6095	“Saudi Arabia is a longstanding companion of ours within the area.
6096	Save the date for Truck or Treat!
6097	Save up the deposit to rent somewhere to live and show them a spreadsheet of income and expenses.
6098	Savings are also provided in consumers' mailboxes through the RetailMeNot Everyday™ direct mail package, and at the pharmacy with RxSaver by RetailMeNot.
6099	Sayers didn’t begin her career with the intention to write mysteries.
6100	Saylor had been arrested Aug. 15, 2014, for an unrelated robbery of My Credit Union in Euless on Aug. 7, 2014.
6101	Says Pastore: ‘Some mobsters would tell the actors how to play the role, or complain that we were making them look bad.
6102	SBA Regional Administrator Dan Nordberg, who oversees SBA operations in Colorado, Montana, South Dakota, North Dakota, Wyoming and Utah, said GAFC funds are a natural fit for the growing high-tech corridors that run through Colorado.
6103	SBI is also in the mineral water industry through a deal with flagship brand Dasani which is now one of the top brands in Somaliland.
6104	‘s box office tracking report sets those markers for the forthcoming ninth installment in the world-famous franchise.
6105	Scan all installed software running in the user space or kernel on the workload for vulnerabilities.
6106	Schakowsky voted in favor of a bill for that passed the U.S. House of Representatives in February that would create universal background checks for gun purchases.
6107	Scheduled 7:30 p.m. to 10:30 p.m.
6108	Scheer compared his big idea to another big one from another century.
6109	Schools were placed on lockdown.
6110	Schulich saw a turnout of nearly 300 students and alumni for their 11th biannual Schulich Startup Night.
6111	Schumacher will return to the track in Bahrain on Wednesday when he tests for Alfa Romeo.
6112	“Scott had been great,” Cullen admits.
6113	Sears is following a trend for retailers, which are slimming down their footprints.
6114	Seating is limited to 50 people, plus an additional 25 spaces reserved for town employees.
6115	“Second, imports must be non-genetically modified (GM) strains as India does not allow the cultivate or import of GM crops.
6116	Second of all, Ariana’s backseat fun with Lala wasn’t a secret that the ladies kept from Tom.
6117	Second, resolve to never let fear take over your imagination.
6118	Second, the charges against us are ludicrous.
6119	Second, the millennial generation, which brings a completely different set of attitudes, values and behaviour.
6120	Section 2 of the ERA is an enforcement clause that mirrors that of the 14th Amendment.
6121	Section 4 relates to abuse of dominant position.
6122	Sectors that can generate jobs, demand and investment, such as housing, roads and railways could lead a boost in public investment.
6123	SecureCoin can be bought or sold on the following cryptocurrency exchanges: CoinExchange and Cryptopia.
6124	Security personnel deployed in PoK to prevent JKLF activists from reaching LOC - OrissaPOSTteen shows big tits and pussy on video chat.
6125	See more photos from the event below…
6126	Seems he is open to a trade to Green Bay.
6127	Seen walking through the terminal at Heathrow today (not long after Dan and Jac walked through the airport), she appeared a woman on a mission, with a determined look on her face and her wedding ring firmly on.
6128	Sega has unveiled its final 12 titles for its new Genesis Mini.
6129	“Selena has experienced much throughout the years and is prepared to impart it to the world.”
6130	Self-exiled founder Pakistani opposition party appears in UK court for 'encouraging terrorism'
6131	Senate leaders usually agree to a package of judicial and executive nominees before a major holiday recess.
6132	“Senator Warren’s idea of how to defeat Donald Trump is to tell people who don’t support her that they are unwelcome in the fight and that those who disagree with her belong in the other party,” Ms. Smith said.
6133	Sen. Cotton said the compromise bill is not enough.
6134	Send the game footage straight to Springfield.
6135	Senior listings for Jan.
6136	Seniors will be divided into men in the soccer teams and mixed in the netball teams.
6137	Sen. Marco Rubio (R-FL) this spring said there is “no evidence whatsoever that money’s been massively poured back into the American worker.”
6138	Sen. Tom Cotton (R-AR) told a local television station that he had been the one who had originated the idea of purchasing Greenland in conversations with Trump months back.
6139	Separate data showed new orders for key U.S.-made capital goods increased by the most in nine months in October and shipments rebounded.
6140	September 12, 2019 at 3:26 PMSacramento just paid out $2 million to the children of that fool who got shot for failing to comply with the cops’ directions.
6141	September 4, 2019 at 12:27 PMGardeners are for the entitled.
6142	September 7th in Maryland, singers from across America will gather to record my new Trump Train 2020 song.
6143	Seriously I sent a text to friends like, 'Am I worth.
6144	Services for children exposed to domestic violence require accessible social services that are long-term and integrated.
6145	Sessions left the Senate to become Trump’s first attorney general.
6146	Seven runs into the ring and tries to make the tag.
6147	Seventeen-year-old surfer and San Clemente resident Caroline Marks has earned a spot on the first U.S. Olympic Surf… https://t.
6148	Seventy-five are still in process.
6149	Several arrests have been made and the venue has been evacuated after officers rushed to the scene at 5.30pm with guard dogs.
6150	Several homes were destroyed, including along a popular strip lined with about 30 seaside cottages that officials now insist will be abandoned for good over the next year — the latest retreat, but certainly not the last.
6151	Several major veterans groups said they had not been consulted by the White House about the possible pardons and were not provided with information they had requested about who was being considered and why.
6152	Several of Prince Andrew's public engagements in Northern Ireland have been cancelled, as a direct result of recent publicity about his relationship with the disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein.
6153	Several other institutional investors have also made changes to their positions in KMB.
6154	Several times the team asks Nicholson excitedly if they should post a clip of a Corbyn zinger.
6155	Several years later, on 12 April 1994, Yad Vashem recognized Bithleem Sumbasi, Melpomeni Dina, Nikos and Petros Axiopoulos, and Makrina and Polixeni Ananiadou as Righteous Among the Nations.
6156	's father blames her husband for her family crisis as he is now facing a potential deportation.
6157	’s first two episodes, especially before the “redux” that tightened up the pace of the quests, helping the people you met while wandering the wilderness could feel tedious.
6158	Shae’ de Bruin shows off some of his soccer skills.
6159	Shameless – In Lazy Lungu’s govt only thieves are rewarded….just look at the mediocrity and someone moronic blogger will ask why I am negative when thugs like Miti who should be behind bars are now incharge of the highest civil service position.
6160	Shannon O’Dunn, formerly dean of communications and fine arts at Grossmont Community College, says she plans to move the gallery across La Mesa Boulevard to a larger space.
6161	Shareholders of record on Friday, March 29th will be given a dividend of 0.07 per share by the bank on Monday, April 15th.
6162	Shareholders of record on Thursday, October 10th will be given a dividend of €0.02 ($0.03) per share on Friday, October 25th.
6163	Shares of Britannia Industries went down by 2.50 per cent to Rs 2,893.10 and Bombay Burmah Trading Corporation fell by 2.40 per cent to close at Rs 1,241.
6164	Shares of California's largest utility have closed down 31 percent on news that the company's equipment might have played a role in another wildfire.
6165	Shares of private sector lender Yes Bank plunged on Tuesday afternoon, after media reports said that ace investor Rakesh Jhunjhunwala may withdraw his $25 million bid.
6166	Sharon is the younger daughter of Pastor Chris and a talented gospel singer.
6167	Shastri was reappointed for a two-year period by the CAC, a decision that was expected.
6168	She added that fishing was also strongly discouraged because the windy weather could make shore-based fishing particularly dangerous.
6169	She added that the release of Marvel movies and the mainstream acceptance of popular culture has changed the convention’s demographics and attendees.
6170	She addressed the criticism of fans that she had been receiving due to her partying videos.
6171	She adds that fourth harmony vocal.
6172	She also called President Trump's earlier about the congresswomen "a sign of ignorance and disrespect, and beneath the dignity of the Office of the President."
6173	She also carried a little black box clutch on the MTV VMAs 2019 red carpet.
6174	She also charged Trump with “injustices that are happening at the border.”
6175	She also hopes the introduction will keep them coming back for a future tour or activity.
6176	She also lost a significant amount of weight as Miller often refused to provide meals for a number of days, as well as forcing her to sleep on the floor or in an outhouse.
6177	She also plays piano and has been practicing the banjo.
6178	She also said the study did not assess "the proportion of clients found not guilty, nor any assessment of sentencing outcomes," however she acknowledged its finding that remuneration of private practitioners was low.
6179	She also understands that the law now makes it harder for her to get a job.
6180	She alvays hed a Czech girlfriend, a voman who was also a beautiful blonde.”
6181	She and her then-husband, social and political activist Tom Hayden, were also often pictured at anti-nuclear demonstrations.
6182	She believes she can do her best to preserve the environment on campus, including working indoors, reducing emissions and being aware outside of the workspace.
6183	She completed her student teaching at Poplar Springs Elementary School.
6184	She continued by emphasizing the importance of the state’s firefighting forces and its work of fighting fires on federal land.
6185	She couldn’t prove it and so that wasn’t why he was fired.
6186	She couldn’t shake her fascination with his story – a “heroic failure,” she called him, searching in vain for the source of the Nile River.
6187	She currently ranks as the 12th best center in the Class of 2019.
6188	She decided that "if you adults don't give a damn about my future, then I won't either."
6189	She devoted her career to improving the lives of African Americans through education, politics, and economic empowerment.
6190	She dyed her hair to get people talking.
6191	She earned her first collegiate eagle after double-bogeying the previous hole.
6192	She explained the product was never approved by the retailer's buyers, was not ordered and should never have made its way onto shelves.
6193	She first applied because she knew the volunteer position would look good on her college application, and because she wanted to meet new people.
6194	She gets double-teamed, but she uses her strength to create space for herself.
6195	She graduated from Hills-Beaver Creek High School in Hills, Minnesota, in 1976, attended community college in Worthington, Minnesota, and graduated from Mankato State University in 1980 with a degree in communication and a concentration on journalism.
6196	“She had also reported to the police.
6197	She had no other symptoms and during examination - aside from the hard, firm growth in her stomach - everything else appeared normal.
6198	She had one goal in mind.
6199	She has a twin sister Kaitlyn, who also played soccer with her in high school, but stopped playing after graduating.
6200	"She has no plans to serve the people.
6201	She has poise and grace, but that doesn't mean she won't stab you in the face.
6202	She has probably already heard that before.
6203	She has trained as the backup beekkeeper and ran proof for 18 years.
6204	She hopes to tour schools across the country and 'educate kids from grassroots levels about the impact of homophobia and racism on players'.
6205	She, however, stressed a need for the authorities to collaborate and address challenges facing women, children and people with disabilities.
6206	She is a former porn star who performed as Rosee Divine.
6207	She is also a prolific writer who has authored/coauthored five books.
6208	She is also expected to call on President Dr Arif Alvi and Prime Minister Imran Khan.
6209	She is a snap to take on walks where she does well meeting other dogs and people.
6210	She is believed died of pneumonia on February 6, aged 86.
6211	She is learning that composer’s Fourth Concerto, but hasn’t decided whether she is ready to perform it.
6212	She is now operating as Almirante Williams.
6213	“She is so happy,” noted the star.
6214	She is wholesome, loves brunch and the thrift store, and carries a big purse.
6215	Shelby was soon found at an illegal poker game.
6216	Shelby will assess fees to the county.
6217	She loves cuddling, sleeping next to the shoes and sunbathing in the window.
6218	"She loves me, she loves me / Why the hell she love me / When she could have anyone else?" he sings on the chorus before listing off several of his flaws, including his tendency of running late to his habit of misplacing his phone.
6219	She manages to run away and, honestly, the movie is pretty tough to watch, which makes sense given the subject matter.
6220	“She might not remember helping a kid …
6221	She now has great self-confidence and has a very bright future ahead.
6222	She opens the project with “Blame On Me,” a track that she calls her testimony.
6223	She ordered the airline to write letters of apology to both complainants and to pay them damages totalling $21,000.
6224	She paused before asking and answering a question: "What does that say about the Hancock team?
6225	Shepolopolo lost the first leg at home 1-0 at Nkoloma before qualifying on away goals rule in Harare.
6226	She promised to continually be in contact with the athletes to ensure their successes during the competition.
6227	She quickly realizes that there’s something wrong in the house.”
6228	She recently told Bosveld Review that her lawyers had advised her not to speak about the matter.
6229	SHERIDAN — Sheridan College Lady Generals wrapped up the home weekend with 2-1 over Otero Junior college Saturday.
6230	She said as against 2,500 participants last year, over 3,000 active participants were expected at this year’s conference.
6231	She said her work in a car factory built her character and she calls her pensioner her wages, 'because I've worked for them'.
6232	She said: “I was going to the gym, running miles and eating salads but my weight kept going up.
6233	She said public health units provide a plethora of services to the public, including immunization, combating infectious diseases, aiding in infant health, and more.
6234	She said Salazar should have been given a lifetime ban: "The arbitrators did not find him culpable of other things that I personally testified about that I feel he should have been held accountable for, so I believe he should have had a lifetime ban.
6235	She said she’s been shocked by angry drivers honking and yelling at Stop For Me activists crossing the street, often with police officers leading the way.
6236	She said that a grand jury indicted the singer, born Robert Kelly, on 10 counts involving four alleged victims, whom Foxx identified as “H.
6237	She says, matter of factly, that: “I don’t like violence but sometimes it’s necessary.”
6238	“She’s had two nice trials, so has a good foundation to run well.
6239	She shaved her head and her actions became less than heroic and questionable at best.
6240	She’s making recommendations for serious policy changes, and I think it’s one of the reasons why she’s doing well.”
6241	She’s not with me today.
6242	She's really leading the charge.
6243	She's recently added a whole load of new labels to her wardrobe, such as Sandro, Ridley London and Elie Saab, but today she has gone back to her trusty L.K. Bennett.
6244	She’s spayed and she has all her shots.
6245	She suggested it was made in light of her medical expertise.
6246	She talks about joy, and holds Dylan upside down for the cameras.
6247	She views the proposed change that would allow biomass to become a renewable fuel source as “systemic genocide.”
6248	She was accused of being a bad mother and wife, but she answered people with her pen.”
6249	She was an old soul with a lust for life, the kindness of an angel and the strength of gladiator.
6250	She was a retired Flight Attendant, serving over 20 years with Northwest Airlines out of LAX.
6251	"She was a strong fighter for so many years, an inspiration to many, a role model to her family, a loving and caring wife."
6252	She was born Virginia Irene Morris on September 28, 1933 in Lynchburg, VA.
6253	She was caught shoplifting food.
6254	She was France's first female minister of finance, the first woman to head the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the first woman to head a large American law firm.
6255	“She was on a tour to north Bengal.
6256	She was one of 13 golfers in the talented 87-player field to finish better than par through the first 36 holes.
6257	She was settling back into that dream for “Steam’s” future, but that shattered as soon as she found out “Phoebe” was Beth.
6258	She was struggling to take care of us.
6259	She was travelling with her boyfriend, James Ellsworth, 31, as well as friend, Jason Baker, 31, and her dog, who all survived.
6260	She will also focus on driving growth for Pureprofile’s programmatic media business.
6261	She will be seen in Maleficent 2. She has also just wrapped up the shooting of Come Away and Those Who Wish Me Dead.
6262	“She will continue and some of our other student athletes will continue for many years to represent our school and our country in the Olympics.”
6263	She will have the honour of reading the Relay for Life Oath at the opening ceremony and also cutting the ribbon.
6264	She will then head to Buckingham Palace to formally resign, before travelling to her Maidenhead constituency.
6265	She wonders whether the migrating soul, by vanishing into another while simultaneously remaining the same, might contain the paradox of empathy.
6266	She won't face the death penalty if convicted because of an agreement with Mexican authorities for her extradition.
6267	She would sneak him food and soon the two developed a plan to escape the castle and elope.
6268	Shifting to the new album, and given its subject matter, was the LGBTQ community on your mind while creating it?
6269	'Shilajit, an ayurvedic herb and adaptogen, may also increase libido and help balance sex hormones.
6270	Shirlie Kemp: 'Losing George Michael made me scared about Christmas'
6271	Shortly after leaving many of the attendees became ill with pneumonia like conditions.
6272	• Shortly after the Buhari-led administration took over office in 2015, the Nigerian economy plunged into recession in 2016 that was largely based on the crash in oil prices as well as falling oil production levels.
6273	Shortly before the US president landed for the start of his state visit to the UK, he launched a Twitter tirade accusing the London mayor of doing a “terrible job” and being a “stone cold loser who should focus on crime”.
6274	Short Nintendo Switch cases (where you store the Switch with the Joy-Con detached to save space) are nearly dead, but not 20 minutes after I wrote their obituarya reader pointed out one option that I’d missed.
6275	Should Americans have a right to be forgotten online?
6276	Should prices secure a weekly close below $1480, Gold is likely to sink towards $1465.
6277	Should this FOX TV show be cancelled or renewed for an 11th season?
6278	Should we demolish or preserve remaining residential school buildings?
6279	Should you are able to type the letter.
6280	“Showing complete disregard for the legal system, the mob ended Mr. Hance’s life and was never held accountable for doing so.”
6281	Shuey, 29, has been joint vice-captain with champion forward Josh Kennedy for the past three years and won the Eagles’ best and fairest this season.
6282	Sierra Leone is among the nations with the highest mortality rate not just in Africa, but the world at large,” She emphasised.
6283	Signage for the General Election Commission is displayed outside the commission’s office in Jakarta, Indonesia.
6284	Sikhs from across the nation will be attending the annual Yuba City Nagar Kirtan.
6285	Silo City Reflection” by Terry Palmer.
6286	Silva, who is in line to make his 400th appearance for Man City, has defied predictions of those who feared he was too small for English football - including Guardiola.
6287	Silversun Pickups will continue its creative evolution this winter as it embarks on a 30-stop U.S. starting Dec. 13 in Eugene, Oregon.
6288	Similarly, a day after returning from this same visit, Erdoğan, in a clear slight to US preferences, elected to throw a financial lifeline, the second in a year, to the Maduro regime in Venezuela.
6289	Similarly, Shannon Airport tweeted, “We are very sorry to hear this news and would like to thank all the staff at The Clare People for your support over the years.
6290	Simonds’s Darwin-equipped homes are already for sale in several suburbs in the Melbourne area including Lyndhurst, a middle-class neighborhood about 25 miles southeast of the city, and Point Cook, about 15 miles to the southwest.
6291	Simply put, if I’m asking myself these questions, what is our incentive to deter impressionable youth from a life of easy money and crime?
6292	Simultaneously receiving an unemployment benefit and wages should be permitted for a month during the whole period of unemployment, Praxis said.
6293	Since 13 Reasons Why Season 3 premiered on Netflix on Friday, August 23, one of the new characters that fans have been asking questions about is Ani Achola.
6294	Since 1988, the proportion of Australians born overseas has risen from 22 per cent to 33 per cent, but their representation in Parliament has stalled at 11 per cent.
6295	Since 2004, the Australia New Zealand Leadership Forums have been attended by numerous Prime Ministers and senior Ministers.
6296	Since 2007, the No.5 Elbe has cruised the Elbe river with tourists and others interested in its historical significance.
6297	‘Since 2010, yearly attendance at Universal Studios Orlando and Islands of Adventure has increased from a combined 12 million guests to nearly an estimated 20 million,’ Ryan Roth, IBISWorld’s lead industry analyst, told USA Today.
6298	Since almost all services have already been re-scheduled, the project period would see cancellation of only five services, a statement from the airport said on November 18.
6299	Since buying a 100% interest in the firm by 1980, the royal family as its sole “shareholder” largely hasn’t interfered in the company’s long-term business decisions as its revenue provides around 60% of all government revenue.
6300	Since he left the business there’s been a lot of infighting and back-biting behind the scenes, that’s the kind of stuff Kevin kept a handle on.”
6301	Since his debut win at Partick Thistle in mid-October, with 26, his team are the leading points gatherers in the second tier.
6302	Since I agree with much of his reasoning for a larger rate decrease, I am including his statement.
6303	Since I am not looking to add anything to the portfolio at the present time, it is an ideal time for me to catch up on foreign markets and share my outlook on things going forward.
6304	Since last-mile connectivity has been a major issue with not only DMRC but other metros as well, this move is going to help immensely.
6305	Since last year, civil servants have been pressing government for a substantial salary increase which is commensurate with the high cost of living, but have so far not received any joy.
6306	Since that meeting, the security aspect of US–Japan relations has been generally stable, while trade has been a sticking point.
6307	Since that you don’t have a lot of experience to produce around or you have simply graduated from university does not mean that you cannot create a restart.
6308	Since their last win England have conceded 11 goals, with nine directly from or the result of poorly defended crosses.
6309	Since the last Council resolution was adopted in September 2017, the situation of human rights in Cambodia, including for the political opposition, human rights defenders, and the media, has drastically worsened.
6310	Since then, he and his congregation have relied upon the charity of others to help construct their new building.
6311	Since then, the late Shanavas had won it, though his voting-winning margin fell sharply from over 1,50,000 in 2009 to just in the 2014 election.
6312	Since the walls are thick concrete you couldn’t knock or talk to neighbors.
6313	"Since Thursday midnight, the armed forces of the Russian Federation and their mercenaries have once violated an indefinite ban on the use of weapons.
6314	Singh was introduced to the late night talk show world with the pressure to uphold the renown that she worked towards for almost nine years as a YouTuber.
6315	Sinn Féin was among the groups supporting today's demonstrations, with Sinn Féin Deputy Leader Michelle O'Neill MLA congratulating Border Communities Against Brexit on mobilising thousands of people to oppose Brexit.
6316	Sir, from Ijaw land, you emerged to become Deputy Governor to our Governor-General, the evergreen Diepreye Alamieyeseigha.
6317	Sir, it was cleaned by a team from imsciences called Imvolunteer lead by shahazad Hanif and his students.
6318	Sir Rod Stewart has unveiled his model railway 26 years after he first embarked upon the project.
6319	Sit down and have chat with your kids.
6320	Six days after the parade, you’ll see them in West Seattle again – the Southwest Athletic Complex at 6:30 pm Friday, July 26th, after SWAC work sent it to an off-peninsula venue last year.
6321	Six teams competed in total with four bringing fish to the scales.
6322	Sixty-six percent believed this to be true — with 28 percent of them picked “definitely true” and 38 percent chose “probably true.”
6323	Ska Keller from the European Green Party, Nico Cue from the European Left and Jan Zahradil from the right-leaning Alliance of Conservatives and Reformists in Europe are the others taking part.
6324	Skill selection and assignment will always be completely open for all players."
6325	SKM has faced court in Victoria and Queensland this week when creditors owed millions of dollars sought that the business be wound up.
6326	Skydiving is an action sport.
6327	Skyview (8-2, 3-2), second place in the 4A GSHL, got its wins from Jonathan Hutley at No. 1 singles, and Brandon Mukensnabl at No. 3 singles.
6328	Slate said the city ultimately gave up on trying to fix the pool, which led to its end.
6329	Slocum said the electronic kiosk should be installed by the end of the week, with the remaining pieces to be added before the dedication in September.
6330	Smashed phones and fax machines have been mounted on the walls and splattered with neon paint in an apparent comment on the traditional Japanese business world’s enduring attachment to outdated technology.
6331	Smith continued in that capacity for eight years.
6332	Smith fell eight runs short of another Ashes century before England stumbled their way to 96-4 at the close of a thrilling day of Test cricket, writes Sam Drury at Lord's.
6333	Smith grew up in Glasgow, MT.
6334	Smith will share his experience in this well-organized initiative where the invited artists worked collaboratively representing a variety of visual and performing arts.”
6335	SMU (4-4) was led by Kayla White, who scored 22 points and hauled in nine rebounds, and Johnasia Cash, who posted 18 points and 16 rebounds.
6336	Snake found dead in Massacre, St. Lucia – how much do you know about its species?
6337	Snell Parade between Athlone Drive and the main entrance to Suncoast Casino.
6338	SNO911 was formed in January 2018 when Snohomish County’s two 911 centers, SNOCOM and SNOPAC, merged.
6339	Snow began to fall as the celebrations kicked off for the Year of the Pig, creating for a chilly but picturesque parade.
6340	So at the end of the film, you do know what the dealio is."
6341	“So basically Rep. Swalwell wants a war.
6342	Socialism is about only one thing, It’s called power for the ruling class.
6343	Socially, the radicals favored something akin to the twentieth-century welfare state.
6344	Social media following: Twitter: 2.6 million, Facebook: 737,200, Instagram: 358,000.
6345	Society today is doing everything it can to erase God from this earth.
6346	So did several large universities.
6347	So do some of Biden’s recent themes: that politics needn’t be uncivil, that bipartisanship is a virtue, that it’s OK to “say a nice word every once in a while about a Republican.”
6348	So, everyone’s dead again.
6349	“So everything a business would be looking for when they want to relocate somewhere or start a new business.”
6350	So far, state judges have stopped short of ordering a replacement map, saying they lacked authority at this stage of the lawsuit filed by Democratic and independent voters.
6351	So far, the biggest impact on the 1st CA/PO Training Brigade has been the Soldiers’ increased workload, Marella said.
6352	"So, first quarter was very subdued.
6353	So he asked that simple question, which is, “What can I do?”
6354	So he had listener Kealy travel up for him instead.
6355	So how could he do it?
6356	So I began smelling myself.
6357	So if a police officer pulls you over and your gender X and they frisk you down since you may be suspected of carrying drugs or weapons then what?
6358	So if love is a risk– are you willing to pay the price?
6359	So if we go back to 2014, which is really when the most recent wave of migrants started coming in, in 2014 what we really saw a lot of was the unaccompanied alien children.
6360	So, if your blood pressure is 120 over 80, your systolic blood pressure would be 120.
6361	So, I just always make sure I do during the daylight time.
6362	So instead, here’s the original flight suit I wore in LIFE!
6363	So in the case of reparations: Would they be paid only to direct descendants of slaves?
6364	So it is alarming that Wisconsin intends to send water out of the basin not because public health demands it, but because a private company wants it.
6365	So it is Mr. Miller, a fierce ideologue who was a congressional spokesman before joining the Trump campaign, who has shaped policy, infuriated civil liberties groups and provoked a bitter struggle within the administration.
6366	“So, it is of no need to making new laws to deal with somebody who publishes falsehood.
6367	So it is with a start-up mindset and, upon an incredible foundation of assets, that we deliver our first slate of new comedies, dramas and unscripted series," new Fox Entertainment CEO Charlie Collier said in a statement.
6368	So it is with lutefisk.
6369	So, I try to go as much as I can, too, and spend as much time in the gym as I can with both of them.”
6370	So it’s a big shift.
6371	So it’s kind of similar to this, you know?
6372	So, it stands to reason will be released in short chunks, too, and that means more focus on specific aspects of this particular story which tracks a complex, multi-year feud between Marvel and DC Comics.
6373	So it's the direct opposite of what everybody thinks.
6374	So it was a dream.
6375	“So I was not surprised when Derek asked apprehensively how many years would pass before the key genes affecting differences in human intelligence would be found.
6376	So I was willing initially to kind of accept this notion that the people who end up bankrupt, the people who end up broke, did something wrong.”
6377	So, I will never get away from teaching.”
6378	So kudos to Franklin for his jiu jitsu maneuver.
6379	“Solar is becoming an even brighter part of Minnesota’s clean energy landscape,” Commerce Commissioner Steve Kelley said in a statement.
6380	Soldiers and police officers immediately targeted them for arrest.
6381	Soldiers ransacked his house while he was detained.
6382	So like the fusion dance, they are separate designs that become one depending on your body's position.
6383	So many of the women are newcomers.
6384	So maybe, just maybe, parents don't always actually know best.
6385	Some 1,200 people have been killed and some 1.2 million displaced in the greatest challenge yet to Abiy's rule.
6386	Some 200 people have been killed in the region that is projected to be a hub of the exploration of natural gas.
6387	“Some are appropriate for our local government to tackle, others aren't.
6388	“Some bought various brands (the horror, the cost!) and some made it, as did our company manager.
6389	Some children in low-income neighborhoods have been forced to drop out of school.
6390	Some continue to put pressure on us.
6391	Some days I wake up and I can’t believe he’s still there.
6392	“Some established international traders can easily push out new traders if they want to manipulate the market.
6393	Some farmers in the Hohoe Municipality of the Volta region have called on government to make farming lucrative to attract the country’s youth.
6394	Some hostages were held for years and beheaded when ransom was not paid, among them a German and two Canadians.
6395	Some Indian nationals have gone public with allegations they were among the targets over the past couple of days; they include journalists, academics, lawyers and defenders of India's Dalit community.
6396	Some Indian nationals have gone public with allegations they were among the targets over the past couple of days; they include journalists, academics, lawyers and defenders of India’s Dalit community.
6397	Some ISOC members still privately denounced the transaction, and now one affiliate has publicly broken ranks.
6398	Some lawmakers say only the creation of federal states, one in the English-speaking regions and the other in the French-speaking areas, can stop the separatist war that has killed more than 3,000 people.
6399	Some might call exercising a hobby, but my breathless search of personal records makes it seem too productive for such a designation.
6400	Some officers had been lining their pockets for years, but their activities became a true conspiracy amid the chaos of 2015-16, as commanders were so desperate to stem the violence that they gave them free rein.
6401	Some of his common releases include forever my love where he featured Bisa Kadie, Confirm, P3 Kakra featuring Criss Waddle, Confirm Remix featuring Sarkodie, Connect, Sales, By heart Boy and Medikal Bra Krom just to mention a few.
6402	Some of the cemeteries range from having two people buried there to dozens — and there are some like the one near the Laurinburg-Maxton Airport, where the markings for where the headstones had been were still there but headstones were nowhere to be found.
6403	''Some of the guys I've idolized,'' Verlander said.
6404	Some of the larger conglomerates are talking to us about their internal processes where our automated voice bots can replace human interaction to a large degree.
6405	Some of the lyrics read like an alternative National Black Anthem.
6406	Some of them can impinge on the fiscal responsibility law, because that law makes provision for what a current expenditure can be.
6407	Some of them carry on to the homes they build in future, whereby every little misunderstanding, they think of separating with their spouses because that is the way they were brought up, this set of children are exposed to many atrocities.
6408	Some of the officers were talking on their radios, and some were corralling practitioners toward a designated area.
6409	Some of the opinions appear to have been made public before, and some have only been cited by the Justice Department in other legal arguments.
6410	Some of the protesters threw bricks at police, attacked them with sticks and rods and sprayed detergent on streets to make it slippery for police.
6411	Some of this winnowing was accomplished using machine learning, mathematical models trained with data to find patterns.
6412	Some of us cautioned then that you cannot present a man to be who he is not.
6413	Someone should make a movie about the saga of the Wailers.
6414	Some people are comparing it to “Happy Together,” but FAM is so much better.
6415	Some said the cameras could be put to better use, or wondered whether to pay current tickets and if they would be reimbursed for tickets they already paid.
6416	Some say by CHLOE. is overhyped, but others swear the food is worth every penny.
6417	Some social media users turned to Twitter to share images and videos showing smoke coming out of the cathedral.
6418	Some states are investigating the legality and structure of the Sackler transfers from Purdue, and the company is reviewing those transactions.
6419	Some talk about God while others laud the great kings of old.
6420	"Some teams will welcome it.
6421	Something different every time!
6422	“Some things he overreacts and some things he underreacts,” the pro-Trump host concluded as his colleagues chuckled.
6423	Something will throw your home and family scene into turmoil.
6424	Something you would hear on the radio.
6425	Sometimes a single moment can define your life and career.
6426	Sometimes drinkers want to do things, well, 'ish.'
6427	Sometimes, during her midday break, she drives home for a nap before the afternoon session.
6428	Sometimes it a yes, others it’s a no, and same with rimming.
6429	Sometimes, music would start playing on my phone despite me not making any gestures on the cuff.
6430	Sometimes, the line can get a little blurry.
6431	“Sometimes they bring their guns and weapons.
6432	Sometimes we had parents asking for one too.
6433	Sometimes, when China punishes a foreign company for violating unstated rules, no one bothers to explain how to rectify the crime.
6434	Sometimes you just need to be in a relationship.
6435	Some traffic rights for the new routing must also be secured,” the airline had said on the closure of Pakistani airspace.
6436	Some very impressive responses and response rate.
6437	Some will be sold to other congregations, while others will become something entirely different — like a nun-themed coffee shop.
6438	Some work it out in a game, some take two years.
6439	Some would call Patriots coach Bill Belichick the greatest coach in NFL history, but Belichick does not believe he deserves that honor.
6440	Sony Pictures Entertainment India will release “Jumanji: The Next Level” on December 13, 2019 in Hindi, English, Tamil and Telugu.
6441	Sony's ruffled some feathers in the world of noise cancelling headphones with its latest top model, the WH-
6442	Soon after, DePass said, Mosheddy and the friend followed her into another person’s stream and called her “racist,” “toxic,” and “a lunatic” for banning them.
6443	Soon after her relationship with Prince Harry started, Markle began telling people that she would “love” to have kids.
6444	“So one day when the central government decides that it doesn’t approve of this behavior, they can be implicated.”
6445	“So one example of that is the victim overlap data has sparked a discussion around providing victim services to prisoners who are currently incarcerated, which has not been the case before.”
6446	So our retention was up half a point.
6447	So people are shocked to discover that being a dick in uniform isn't a crime in Texas?
6448	So people can feel that way (projects moving to Vidarbha at the cost of Marathwada).
6449	Sophomore Annah Schussman and senior Kaylie Johnson each added a goal and assist to help UWS sweep NCU in the two-match season series.
6450	Sophomore Julia Hunt says the lockdown went off just how the school previously practiced.
6451	Sophomore Tate Curran was runner-up with his second-place vault of 4.97 meters.
6452	So say the Bengals do win some games and risk losing draft position.
6453	So, she'll be forever blowing Bubbles?
6454	So some of them morphed into love songs about my partner, and some turned into something much deeper.
6455	So that’s how I approached it.
6456	So that’s on my agenda to get to him and talk about it.”
6457	So that's what that is, he blameshifted.
6458	So that’s what you have to do.
6459	So there’s a silver lining in this dark cloud, but that’s no comfort to those that’s living in the middle of that dark cloud,” Sharpton said.
6460	So there’s no deal.
6461	So they also searched for another route by going north.
6462	So they do a little bit of everything,” she explained.
6463	So, they were deposited on a group of small islands collectively known as Monkey Island.
6464	So this time around, not scared at all.
6465	Sounds fair, if the boys have to wear ties.
6466	Sounds like things are getting hairy.
6467	Sourav Ganguly has promised a new start for the BCCI and to do what’s best for Indian cricket.
6468	Sources tell Vt is possible the character could be killed off or the role could be recast.
6469	South African actress Pearl Thusi and Eddie Kadi were the hosts of the show.
6470	South Africa, the continent's second largest economy, is a major destination for other African migrants.
6471	South Bend, Indiana, Mayor Pete Buttigieg and Sen. Cory Booker, D-N.
6472	“South Dakota 4-H Volunteer Hall of Fame inductees are individuals who model the impact that a caring adult can have in the life of a child through the 4-H program.
6473	So we can keep you informed on where each mayoral candidate stands with these public issues.
6474	So, we decided to look for most mind-blowing questions there are.
6475	So, we’re bringing on top line with the commercial unit that’s profitable on a standalone basis, again, not contributing to burn just the opposite in fact.
6476	“So we said, ‘Come on, we have to do it’ and changed.”
6477	So we’ve been lucky enough that the city already had support for theaters like ours running non-typical Hollywood blockbusters.”
6478	So what better time to test the health of this 250-year-old Edinburgh institution?
6479	So what would you like them to do?
6480	So when choosing a home insurance plan, you can actually opt for the things that you want to get cover for along with your home insurance.
6481	“So when I got into cricket I decided that the best thing I can do now is contribute in what has always been my first love … and I started this foundation that looks after the children of all the martyrs,” he added.
6482	So when it came time to plan this season’s BFWMN, Tim invited Bah to be part of the lineup.
6483	So when we say we have somehow achieved some milestone, we better be in touch with the thing that in the first place got us to be successful.
6484	So, while the Cavs hope they can land the first overall pick, they at least need to secure a top-three pick Tuesday night.
6485	So, while we are no longer selling Daydream View or supporting Daydream on Pixel 4, the Daydream app and store will remain available for existing users."
6486	So, with that in mind, let's take a look at 10 jokes that have already aged poorly.
6487	So you actually believe that Canadians who were antigay marriage before it was legalized suddenly welcomed it?
6488	So, you can expect the finale episode to go live on Jan 28. Within a month, the final season will be available for Netflix US users.
6489	"So you know, grandma's joining."
6490	So you miss 11 shots and you add seven offensive rebounds into that, that’s a pretty good equation.”
6491	Sozo Coffee Roasting, located at 576 N. State Street in Ionia, has been “trying to save good people from bad coffee” ever since Rodney and Mindy Hensley opened their business around a decade ago.
6492	Space Kiddettes jump around a lot on Saturday, June 8 at Axelrad with Tee Vee, Darsi, DJ E$, and DJ Dom Top.
6493	Spare us your categorical denial it only serves to make your more categorically a fool.
6494	Sparo arrives in Asheville — a city he visited every autumn with his family while living in the Triangle, for sojourns along the Blue Ridge Parkway to take in the seasonal color — after an especially busy year.
6495	Speaking at the recent international launch of the company’s new smartphones, CEO Richard Yu that South Africa was a key market for the Chinese smartphone manufacturer.
6496	Speaking in the council chamber on Tuesday night, Cr Adams said she wanted the state government to take more responsibility for protecting bus drivers in the course of their duties.
6497	Speaking in the House of Commons today, Mr Johnson said he wanted talks on an all-Ireland approach to agriculture and food products.
6498	Speaking of absurdly expensive box sets, pre-orders for Marvel's The Infinity Saga Collector's Edition 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set are live right here at Best Buy for $549.99 with a release date slated for November 15th.
6499	Speaking of a lack of senses, the American remake, “The Upside,” is about Philip (Bryan Cranston), an affluent quadriplegic who can’t feel anything below his neck.
6500	Speaking of Alex’s dad, I’d like to give him the award for Grimmest Thanksgiving Prayer of All-Time: “Father, please bless and keep safe our children.
6501	Speaking on the BBC Today Programme, Dame Deirdre Hutton, the chair of the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), criticised the company's lack of foresight.
6502	Speaking on the occasion Sumeet Khimji, Director Khimji Jewellers said, “It is a blessing for Khimji Jewellers to get an opportunity to craft the exquisite Gold Mukut for Maa Durga.
6503	Speaking recently to El Chiringuito TV, Mathias Pogba reacted to Real Madrid defender Sergio Ramos saying he is a Pogba fan.
6504	Speaking to Entertainment Now!, Muliyehi Mutabelezi, who is part of the organising committee, said they will be diversifying the Zambezi Music Awards (ZAMAs) concept to make it broader to accommodate as many youths as possible throughout the new year.
6505	Speaking to Extra TV at the star-studded event at Los Angeles’ Microsoft Theater, she disclosed: “Vera Wang is definitely making my dress”.
6506	Speaking to the BBC in 1994, Hall recalled a “lyrical masterpiece”, describing it as “a great tragic play about living: what is it like to be alive, waiting for death…?
6507	Speaking with reporters later Tuesday, Pence said he understood "political attacks by Democrats" regarding his stay at Trump's resort.
6508	Spearheading the protest, the LAC had earlier indicated that the negotiations would focus on the distribution, between army and protest leaders, and the seats of the Sovereign Council as well as on its future leader.
6509	Special Report: A Teen’s Pleas for Help… Ignored?
6510	Special thanks to Magnolia Pictures.
6511	Speed cameras have reduced the number of crashes in the city since they were implemented, and have been for legislation allowing their use to be extended until 2022.
6512	Sphere can be purchased on these cryptocurrency exchanges: Bittrex and Upbit.
6513	Sphere (SPHR) traded up 3.2% against the dollar and now trades at $0.59 or 0.00011085 BTC.
6514	Splunk presently has an average rating of “Buy” and a consensus price target of $143.
6515	Spoiler: They’re not cheap.
6516	Spota’s lawyer, Alan Vinegrad, said in a closing argument that the former prosecutor had taken steps to get the beating investigated and that the case was “guilt by association.”
6517	‘s price target indicates a potential upside of 60.73% from the company’s previous close.
6518	Squarely blaming the Shiv Sena for the dramatic turn of events in Maharashtra, Union Minister Ramdas Athawale on Saturday urged NCP chief Sharad Pawar to walk over to the NDA camp, hinting that he might be rewarded with a plum portfolio at the Centre.
6519	Sreeprakash said he did not try to get permission to access the office at odd hours from higher-ups in the department.
6520	Sridhar added: “That also keeps you warm between overs and doesn’t allow your body to cool down.
6521	SRINAGAR — Indian security forces injured at least six people on Saturday in Srinagar, the main city in the Indian-controlled part of Kashmir, as several protests broke out against New Delhi’s revocation of the region’s autonomy last week.
6522	's Rs 509 plan offers 1.4GB data per day, 100 SMSs per day, unlimited calling (local and STD), access to Airtel TV and Wynk music service for 90 days.
6523	Staffers were unable to revive him.
6524	STANBIC IBTC Bank Plc has introduced a suite of educational payment products that will ease the burden of school fees which parents and guardians have to bear.
6525	Starring Letitia Hector, this witty comedy is about a single girl trying to navigate the London dating scene.
6526	Start by typing in a URL to view the archived versions of that site.
6527	Startups like OpenALPR (recently acquired by Rekor) and Flock Safety have jumped into the scene.
6528	Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order has proven to be one of the most exciting Star Wars game releases in quite some time.
6529	State of economy alarming: BJP allieshttps://indianexpress.
6530	State of New Jersey Common Pension Fund D trimmed its holdings in Hanesbrands Inc. (NYSE:HBI) by 10.0% in the first quarter, according to the company in its most recent Form 13F filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
6531	State police remind that animals can suffer from heat exhaustion and heat stroke, just like humans.
6532	State Representative Beth Griffin of Mattawan is a co-sponsor of legislation designed to help prevent suicides in Michigan.
6533	Statues are funded with the help of the public through the gift shop.
6534	Stay indoors and close all windows and doors when the air quality is low.
6535	Stay tuned for further updates.
6536	Steelers fans are just that way and you’ll get to pay them back on the field in 2 weeks.
6537	Steer clear of the area if you can.
6538	St. Elizabeth, meanwhile, scored many of its points inside, but they struggled from the free throw line, making just five of 12 in the half.
6539	Stents are placed but it can be days later.'
6540	Stephanie Germain will also executive produce alongside co-executive producer Hannah, who is also the author of international blockbusters including.
6541	Stephens set a $12.00 price target on shares of New York Community Bancorp and gave the company a “hold” rating in a report on Friday, November 1st.
6542	Stepping up in Samuels’ absence was Desiree Elmore.
6543	Sterling opened up to Us Weekly regarding what is expected in the first episode back.
6544	Steve Becker, Chief Executive Officer and Stacie Shirley, Chief Financial Officer will conduct a fireside chat on Thursday, October 3, 2019 at 10:00 a.m. Eastern Time.
6545	Steve, do you know how hurt I was?”
6546	STEVENSVILLE, Mont. (AP) — About 30 bison escaped a western Montana ranch and ended up on the highway near Stevensville, where two suffered fatal injuries after being struck by a pickup truck.
6547	Steve posted a photo of himself with his wife Sheree and his kids Makena (15), Jack (12), and Brooklyn (4) looking great and smiling big, along with the following message: “The best.
6548	Steve Price was delighted to banish the memories of last year’s Challenge Cup final as Warrington Wolves defeated St Helens 18-4 at Wembley.
6549	Steve Smith (seen here shadow-hitting an upper cut while falling to the ground in an attempt to duck a bouncer) scored 82, his ninth straight Test 50 against England.
6550	Stewart was accused of defrauding the 29-year-old labourer by representing himself as a female to him.
6551	St. Faustina, a Polish nun canonized by St. John Paul II in 2000, recorded the words of Jesus in her journal: “Let the greatest sinners place their trust in my mercy.
6552	Stifel Nicolaus boosted their price objective on Home Depot to $230.00 and gave the company a “buy” rating in a research report on Monday, August 12th.
6553	Still, even though 5G is expected to be a big trend in 2020 and beyond, the fund has actually lagged the broader market since it began trading in March.
6554	Still, her October birthday is an admittedly far more somber anniversary than it used to be.
6555	Still, her stage presence comes off as calculated rather than contrived.
6556	Still, I persisted figuring, as kids often do, that I’d wear them down.
6557	Still lying in a police cell on that Monday evening I began to reflect on what had led me to this moment.
6558	Still today, they occasionally post throwback photos of the two of them from when they were teenagers and reminisce on all of their memories together.
6559	Still, we’re missing a big part of the picture.
6560	Still, with rampaging animals, mercenaries on their tail and an assortment of other obstacles and problems, it’s not like the events of Welcome to the Jungle were a cakewalk.
6561	Stir until smooth and heated all the way through (just until barely boiling).
6562	St John and WFA will submit their full funding request - off the back of their initial bid last December - to Government by the end of this year.
6563	ST JOHN’S, Antigua - The Barbuda People’s Movement (BPM) said declaring the sister isle a port of entry remains a priority for the party.
6564	St. Joseph’s Oratory is among Canada’s largest churches, and pilgrims from all over the world are drawn to its domed roof and stunning architecture.
6565	Stockholders of record on Friday, December 6th will be issued a dividend of $0.35 per share.
6566	Stockholders of record on Friday, March 29th will be paid a dividend of $0.175 per share.
6567	Stocks on Wall Street ended in the green Wednesday.
6568	Stonehage Fleming Financial Services Holdings Ltd purchased a new stake in shares of TJX Companies in the 2nd quarter valued at approximately $1,223,000.
6569	Stop by and support your fellow Chamber member.
6570	Stores could be fined from $500 to $1,500 for each violation of the proposed ban.
6571	Stormy Daniels gained international recognition after claiming shortly after President Donald Trump took office that she had an extramarital affair with the president several years prior.
6572	Stowe: 500 block Pleasant Ridge Rd – residential structure fire; responders on scene reporting structure fully-involved.
6573	St-Pierre holds the rank of black belt in Kyokushin karate, Brazilian jiu-jitsu, and Gaidojutsu.
6574	Straight after the break, the home backline again showed their pace and flair and another swift move downfield ended with flanker Juan Schoeman finishing off the attack with a drive over the line, leaving the Hurricanes with just a three-point lead.
6575	Straight lining leaf worms beneath the boat has been producing most of the fish.
6576	Stranger Things season 4 'set to add three new teenage characters'
6577	Stream "Life With Dog" right now on PureFlix.
6578	Street Dancer 3D New Posters On ‘How’s The Hype?’: BLOCKBUSTER Or.
6579	Strickland is currently in the process of appealing the ruling.
6580	Strikes to the head or body are worth 5 points; to the arms or legs, 3 points; on hands, 1 point.
6581	Stromboli’s population is around 500, while its economy is based almost entirely on tourism.
6582	Strom says the case has taken a toll on her health and she’s experiencing a range of emotions.
6583	Stronger background checks will help keep guns away from dangerous people,” Gianaris said.
6584	Stuart Gerson on the case for impeachment from the right.
6585	Student and Nobel laureate Malala Yousafzai founded the fun to invest in local education leaders and programmes to ensure that girls all over the world access to safe, quality education.
6586	Student-athletes at TKA have gone on to successful collegiate athletic careers at some of the most accomplished universities in the country, as well as professional athletic careers in baseball, basketball, football, soccer and volleyball.
6587	Students jumped in alarm, and were directed to the lunchroom for an impromptu assembly.
6588	Stuff-A-Thons will be held in Escambia County at 10 a.m.-6 p.m. on Wednesday, July 17, at the Mobile Highway and Creighton Road Walmart locations.
6589	Styles called out Orton for only having one move after these years in the company.
6590	Subby desperately needs to be taken out and shot.
6591	Subianto, who also lost to Widodo in 2014, has declared himself the winner and alleged massive fraud but provided no credible evidence.
6592	Submissions may be handwritten.
6593	Subsequent studies confirmed the CBD-induced reduction in conditioned freezing expression with acute administration before retrieval (Lemos et al., ) or acquisition (Levin et al., ).
6594	Successful people-;whether business people, athletes, musicians or artists-;didn't get where they are by accident.
6595	“Successful players will be accommodated at the clubhouse in Muldersdrift for the duration of the 2019/ 20 SAB season.”
6596	Such high stellar masses imply that these stars live fast and die young, burning through the hydrogen fuel in their stellar interiors very quickly, sometimes in only a few million years.
6597	Such strategies will let potential local customers and clients become familiar with what you are about and the services you provide.
6598	Sudan protest groups calls for strike starting next Tuesdayhttps://indianexpress.
6599	Sue Lyon, the actress who at age 14 starred as the title character in Stanley Kubrick’s adaptation of “Lolita,” died Thursday in Los Angeles.
6600	Suggs, 37, could be an intriguing late-season pickup as he posted 5 1/2 sacks and four forced fumbles this season, his first in Arizona after 16 seasons with the Baltimore Ravens.
6601	Sullivan-Bennis, who represents a number of Guantanamo prisoners, says the men asked different questions of her.
6602	Sumner Surf Lifesaving Club head instructor and club captain Kate Suter says one task she is responsible for is teaching lifeguards to become inflatable rescue boat drivers.
6603	Sunday marked the end of this year’s Welcome Weekend, a three-day slew of hall programming and events designed to welcome all first-year and transfer students to Notre Dame, orient them to life on campus and acquaint them with their fellow Domers.
6604	Sunday’s rescue was the second major operation on the lake this morning.
6605	Sun Sport revealed on the weekend, Eagles transfer chief Dougie Freedman has made an enquiry over his availability.
6606	SUNY Chancellor Kristina Johnson the presidential search last month.
6607	Supermarkets are going the extra mile on safety precautions.
6608	Surely he’d want nothing more to do with Sam?
6609	Surendra Gadling says deposition before panel may cause prejudice in trial court; Sudhir Dhawale to depose today.
6610	Sure, the Kavalry and the Klan don’t need to be treated like they’re going to a five-star hotel when they’re in police custody.
6611	Sure, there’s the build to Survivor Series, but it’s caused the creative forces to hold off on booking a lot of programs between the wrestlers within their respective brands.
6612	Surprisingly, one of the jurors worked for WCPO Television, a local station that has filed numerous lawsuits against Hunter.
6613	Sushmita Sen, Madhuri Dixit and Sunny Leone shared their photos on social media.
6614	Sutton, 23, finished his rookie season with 42 receptions for 704 yards and four touchdowns.
6615	Swift marked her 30th birthday by sharing a throwback picture on Twitter.
6616	Swift's 2019 American Music Awards performance was a headline-grabbing moment before she even took the stage on Sunday night.
6617	Swissbakers announced it's closed all four locations in Allston, Reading, North Station and on campus at Harvard University.
6618	Swiss National Bank now owns 19,100 shares of the business services provider’s stock worth $1,662,000 after buying an additional 300 shares during the period.
6619	Sydney Watson dissects this feminist garbage, along with other insane true stories.
6620	Syed says he believes Simba was saying hi to the visitor.
6621	Syscoin (SYS) traded up 3.4% against the dollar and now trades at $0.0259 or 0.00000246 BTC.
6622	Tabula Rasa HealthCare ( it has acquired PrescribeWellness for $150 million.
6623	Tact and reason, never Gohmert's strong suits, were no longer important.
6624	Tague traditions were important to her, she had a remarkable close bond with her siblings.
6625	Take the pressure off for others by helping them take their first steps toward building their own power circles.
6626	Take the second exit for Green Mountain Falls.
6627	Taking advantage of the chaos, there was some looting Monday — but traders still felt anger only toward the president.
6628	Taking him late in the second round was not a stretch at all.
6629	Taking into account our swap agreements 98% of our debt is now fixed rate debt providing clarity to our future interest expense.
6630	Taking on the UP grand alliance of SP-BSP and RLD, Modi said that merely changing the signboard does not change the shop.
6631	Taking to social media to speak to her fans about her struggles as part of Mental Health Awareness Week, the soap actress explained that she suffered a break up last year that left her mental health in tatters.
6632	Talented shortstop Adalberto Mondesi had shoulder surgery but should be back next season, and outfielder Jorge Soler set a club record with 48 homers last season.
6633	“Talk about being left with the tab,” she recalls.
6634	Talk about satisfaction!
6635	Talking directly to the mammal she added: “And you didn’t spray, you were very well-behaved.”
6636	“Talking Reality TV Show Blues,” a history of the medium that fucked us all over more than Zuckerberg can even dream, ends as it must with the 2016 election but gets there by artful and circuitous roots.
6637	Tapping the “+” button will also bring up additional tools.
6638	Taraji P. Henson & Terrence Howard Bring 'Empire' to Fox Upfronts!
6639	Task continued to dominate in the second quarter, even hitting the 1000-point mark in her career.
6640	Tausende von Konzertbesuchern wollten in Las Vegas Country Music geniessen.
6641	Tavares, whose initial five-year term as CEO will begin once the deal has closed and gained all approvals, will have the additional seat on the board.
6642	Tax compliance it terms of filing and remittance is a growing part of the Avalara solution.
6643	Tax experts have sought clarity over certain provisions of the latest circular issued by the GST policy wing of the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) on Monday.
6644	Taylor has been charged with one count of fraud over $5,000 and forging of documents.
6645	Taylor MacDonald, a fire information officer in Kamloops, says there were 20 personnel working during the night with heavy equipment with more arriving.
6646	TD has been the topic of several other reports.
6647	TDS has been the subject of several research analyst reports.
6648	Team members from Facebook Research are using the 3D sandbox game because of its near limitless ability to create and rules that are "simple and predictable within certain limits" according to MIT Technology Review.
6649	Tea Party should conduct debate, would Sarah and Michele do it?
6650	Ted continues his preview of key positional battles heading towards training camp, this time defense and special teams.
6651	TEE executes at the same time as the Android OS and runs only trusted code shielded from user-installed apps.
6652	Teel allowed just three hits, all singles, struck out five, and didn’t walk a batter over seven innings.
6653	Television projects include The Falcon and the Winter Soldier, all upcoming series planned for release exclusively on Disney+.
6654	TELUS presently has an average rating of “Buy” and a consensus price target of $47.
6655	Temperatures will likely be a few degrees below freezing outside of 495 through mid-morning on Thursday, making for slippery driveways, sidewalks and untreated side roads.
6656	Tenants in addition to Sears that have exited the center include Payless Shoe Source and more recently Dress Barn.
6657	Tendulkar scored 482 runs, and was the second-highest run scorer in the tournament after Sri Lankan opener Tillakaratne Dilshan, who scored 500 runs.
6658	Tension also arose in Paris as an authorized evening gathering, dubbed "Yellow Night," at Republic square was curtailed by police as they quickly moved in to disperse protesters.
6659	Tensions between the executives and the journalists had been simmering for months.
6660	Tensions decreased between the two countries, so the All India Tennis Association (AITA) announced a strong team to go to Islamabad in July.
6661	Tens of thousands of soldiers are on standby to maintain public order.
6662	Ten weeks from today, Saskatchewan will enter the 2020s.
6663	Terms of the deal weren’t disclosed, but it means the startup is advancing a small-molecule and an antibody treatment in parallel.
6664	Terry Sanford was dominant from the outset and cruised to a 45-0 win over the Pirates.
6665	Tesla is slashing costs to sell a $35,000 Model 3 as promised, and shuttering most of its retail locations to sell cars online, laying off more staff in the process.
6666	Tesla nailed a pylon while leaving fancy restaurant Nobu in his fancy new truck.
6667	Testifying before the House Judiciary Committee in the morning, Mueller had a few notable stumbles.
6668	Test out different lengths to see what works best for you, but a general rule: Subject lines of fewer than 45 characters and preheaders of fewer than 100 characters tend to fit best on mobile devices.
6669	Tests from two of the white-tailed deer were positive for EHD, while the other deer were too decomposed to test.
6670	TFL not just runs public transport, but also regulates all other forms of transport in London.
6671	"Thanks in great part to the newcomers we have welcomed throughout our history, Canada has developed into the strong and vibrant country we all enjoy," Ahmed Hussen, minister of wrote in an annual report to Parliament.
6672	“Thanks to all my friends who support me.
6673	Thanks to its bonkers storyline, there’s no surprise there.
6674	"Thank you all for everything I have had the opportunity to experience in Paris," he said.
6675	Thank you for your service Keston.
6676	Thank you, John Singleton, for connecting us all.
6677	Thank you so much for cheering me on so I could stay strong till the last show.
6678	Thank you to my sister, my father and friends who supported me immensely.”
6679	Thank you to the firefighters, whose automatic reaction wasn’t fearing for yourself, but fearing for both neighbors and strangers, showing bravery in the middle of tragedy.
6680	That also means that a spouse who gets divorced this year and receives alimony this year will not count the payments as income on the tax return filed next year.”
6681	That being said, it is because of this childhood commitment to one role that he hasn't had as much opportunity to branch out as much as other actors.
6682	That being said, you want a business that is most profitable for you.
6683	That came after a tense meeting between Turkish officials and Trump’s national security adviser John Bolton in Ankara, aimed at coordinating the pullout process after Bolton set conditions that appeared to postpone it indefinitely.
6684	That came just a few months after Microsoft discontinued Windows Phone 8.1, the final operating system sporting the Windows Phone name.
6685	"That can be facilitated by making information available," said Marwick, "who contributed expertise on Southeast Asia and assisted with putting all of ArchaeoGLOBE's materials online, accessible to anyone."
6686	That can make your professional life and home life bleed together, which is stressful because you’re never off-duty.
6687	That can’t happen,” tweeted the Minnesota Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party and directed readers how to donate.
6688	That changed recently, resulting in the addition of the name of Homer Williams Brooks, Flagler County’s ninth sheriff, earlier this month.
6689	That could put the Arab parties in a position to block Netanyahu from continuing as prime minister if they decide to break with precedent and endorse Gantz for the job.
6690	That deal came at a price.
6691	That decision meant both of Pope's parents made it off the ship alive, along with their daughter.
6692	That didn’t happen, though it was never explained why.
6693	That didn’t stop Soviet engineers, who had workers in pressurized suits weld 60-millimeter thick titanium plates of the Project 661’s pressure hull in the argon gas-flooded Building No. 42 in Severodvinsk.
6694	That doesn't identify this particular dog.'
6695	That doesn’t mean raising a blind eye to such abuses, but rather to avoid being complicit in them.
6696	That doesn’t mean those programs are bad — just that they’re programs we have to pay for regularly, which are subject to normal financing requirements.
6697	That ended Osaka’s 16-match Grand Slam winning streak, which included titles at the U.S. Open final in September — when she beat Williams in the final — and at the Australian Open in January.
6698	That firearm and that person is now in police custody pending this investigation.
6699	That first unit’s gotta figure it out.
6700	That forced Pouncey, who was already sliding to his right, to come over a little harder to try to account for Phillips’ power.
6701	That fraternity was shuttered.
6702	ThatGuyFromTheInternetWhy would guests want to mingle in the lobby?
6703	That has nothing to do with a sexual assault claim.
6704	That includes holding the president accountable, and begins by having Mueller testify before Congress.
6705	That includes NFL MVP candidate Lamar Jackson, who is the first Baltimore quarterback selected in 23 years.
6706	That indifference to the sport doesn’t reflect on its quality, though; it’s a lovingly curated, diverse and keenly satirical game.
6707	That investigation resulted in a sweetheart plea deal that landed Epstein in jail for just 13 months.
6708	That Iraq just got done refusing the US permission to base more troops in Western Iraq might also give them a motive to hit Iraqis in the area, though if this proved to be the case, it would be a huge problem for US-Iraqi relations.
6709	That is not detailed in today’s press release, however, which focuses instead on the reasons for the closure, specifically citing rationalization and blaming the “enactment of misguided regulations in New York City earlier this year.”
6710	That makes it difficult to begin questioning or refuting analytics and algorithms, and adds to the distrust.
6711	That much was clear from the start.
6712	That neighbor told CBS4 she heard about eight shots and she believes they were from two guns.
6713	That never happened, Shapiro said — though by all accounts C.I.A. officers did examine the contents of the computers Senate investigators used.
6714	That no longer applies.
6715	That number is up from 13 deaths in 2018 and 11 in 2017.
6716	That one follows an 11-year-old aspiring wrestler (Carr), who after discovering a magical mask, enters a competition to become the next WWE Superstar.
6717	That philosophy is false, because of the beauty and wonder of creation, the moral law within us, and the logic of the Bible’s Holy Scriptures.
6718	That question appears at the bottom of the Schedule.
6719	That’s a bankrupt model – one that puts institutions ahead of the students they are supposed to serve.
6720	'That's a big draw.
6721	Thats against the NFL folks.
6722	That's a good way to guarantee a loss.
6723	“That said, Tennessee students deserve better, and I think we can deliver that.
6724	That's all we needed to know, thanks.
6725	“That’s always what we strive to do when we come up here.
6726	That's a national average; take a walk through your home and count the number of devices you have plugged in (don't forget the washing machine) and you may find that you're spending 25% of your energy bill to feed vampires.
6727	That’s a place, he says, where bookings are on the rise.
6728	That’s a quality Efron has demonstrated throughout his career, so on paper, that tracks.
6729	That's a reason "why" to leave - the result of leaving, irrespective of the why, is that ISIS regains strength and again becomes a threat to us and Europe - i.e., we lose.
6730	That’s a solid 10 degrees warmer than average for this time of year.
6731	That's a solid set of features, but at £899 this soundbar isn't cheap – especially given it doesn't support object-based audio, such as Dolby Atmos, and there's no separate subwoofer included.
6732	That’s because, as Emma Tillinger Koskoff told The Hollywood Reporter at a producer roundtable, they made.
6733	That season was the team’s worst in nearly a decade.
6734	That second time, they made it to the U.S. But she was deported, and so she tried again.
6735	That seemed to be confirmed when MWF board chairman told Urban Milwaukee the festival no longer considers itself a partner of the city.
6736	That’s how Kay Toran, director of the Portland VOA, sees Wapato working.
6737	That’s like a pastor saying he’s collecting offering for the church, but spending it on himself.
6738	That's more than £100 off the typical £249.95 price tag.
6739	That’s not a forever plan.
6740	That's not great news if you aren't equipped with the highest speed internet available, which many social equity applicants likely do not.
6741	That’s not the only thing the two love birds have in common!
6742	That's okay with me, I watch a bunch of Canadian shows, and am familiar with these guys.
6743	"That's one big thing, we want to make sure that we are showing a presence in those neighborhoods," said Fresno Police Sgt. James Rossetti.
6744	That’s one of the best ways to engage with your students because you should do what they love; get connected and stay connected.
6745	"That's our main focus right now, is what is the value, how do we bring value to the membership," Johnson said, along with fundraising and bringing in new members.
6746	That's pretty apparent in the piece Moore just published on The Players Tribune website, in which the Lynx's tough-but-happy star announced she'd be taking next year off to focus on things outside basketball.
6747	That’s right, the break-ups are getting real.
6748	That’s Tebow’s second homer of the season.
6749	That’s thanks to $10 million in state bond money for a demolition and construction project.
6750	That’s the attention battle newly joined by Facebook.
6751	That's the ethical tightrope that Biden will attempt to walk between now and the Democratic primary elections, and potentially the general election.
6752	"That's the president going, the oil companies need to make more than the American farmer.
6753	That’s the same amount as the difference between number two on the list ().
6754	That's the takeaway from a of 34,000 workers in 18 countries worldwide, sponsored by Verint, which finds technology may help more than it hurts when it comes to workplace stress.
6755	“That’s the way I used to play before I grew so much.
6756	That's the way we all became the Brady Bunch!
6757	That’s the way you build up a monster – a DQ win.
6758	That suggests the issue is far from resolved, although there is one reason Moscow may have for thinking it has made progress toward achieving its goal in this region.
6759	“That’s what make it special that every night I’m out there, no matter the result, no matter how many points I score, I’m playing for something bigger than myself.”
6760	That's what's happened to farmers.
6761	That’s when Caswell went to his truck, got a 9mm handgun, came back, and pointed it at the man’s head.
6762	That’s when the California State Assembly and Senate unanimously passed SB 206, also known as the Fair Pay to Play Act.
6763	That's when Ward and her fellow interns found what appeared to be mould on artifacts at the University of Ottawa's little-known Museum of Classical Antiquities.
6764	That’s where a whole bunch of other conversations came from, and I think that was sort of the basis for the progression of their relationship, was building it out all around that, just to make it all fit.”
6765	That's where the difference is.
6766	That’s why voting with our dollars at businesses can be just as powerful as donating to charity — and sometimes, one action does both.
6767	That’s why we asked April Setliff of Red Stick Refinement for some ideas on what you can do to get your child ready to party…
6768	That’s why we’re going to cut AB effective today.
6769	That theft of an expensive stroller the other day was a classic example, even though the group itself was relatively small.
6770	That vision was largely borne out.
6771	That volatility is unlikely to fade as Washington and Beijing move forward with another round of negotiations.
6772	That was a particularly anti-democratic move, but it is hardly unique to the Tar Heel State.
6773	That was fairly easy, though, because Smalley and her friends were, she said, “teachers’ pets.”
6774	That was something that we wanted to get into the movie as well, that idea.
6775	“That was the best moment of her entire life, that exact moment,” Jackie’s cousin said.
6776	That was the final score of the half as it was 10-7 when both teams headed to the locker room.
6777	That was the promise from KCC leader Cllr Paul Carter.
6778	”That was what the president did (Mr Jonathan).
6779	That was when she met Officer Yarkut.
6780	That way, instead of wondering what the heck is going on with that associate acting like a lunatic, she can process the news that you want out and, maybe even work together with you to find a solution.
6781	That way, it can spot when you’re reaching for the phone and turn on the face unlock system even before you’ve grabbed it.
6782	That would be a healthy bow for the low-budget horror pic, but it’s down slightly from the first film, which generated $26 million and went on to pocket $125 million worldwide.
6783	That would be something to brag about!
6784	That would have delayed the hiring process, she and Verney agreed, and would have been costly.
6785	… That would require either a 33% payroll tax or a 78% national sales tax, and that’s how Europe funds their socialism.
6786	That year, it became illegal at the federal level to give the government an excuse to crack down on minorities.
6787	The 15-year-old then complained about headaches and was taken to hospital.
6788	The 16 year-old has been on the ice since she was a toddler.
6789	The 1966 “Uniform Time Act” stated that states can legally exempt themselves from daylight saving time, but states cannot opt to go with daylight saving time year round.
6790	The 198 people who complained to TV regulator Ofcom when Love Island contestant Amy Hart was seen crying after being dumped by (don’t laugh) “half-boyfriend” Seriously?
6791	The 2001 move to Amsterdam arose partly from the desire to distance its building materials business from Australians who fell victim to asbestos exposure in the bad old days.
6792	The 2019 FIFA Women’s World Cup will be held in France, which becomes the fourth country to host both the men’s and women’s World Cup, having hosted the men’s in 1938 and 1998.
6793	The 20-year-old No. 4 overall pick from 2017 made his NHL debut in Game 3, even scoring a goal in the game.
6794	The 24-year-old model and actress is only the second openly transgender woman to be hired by Victoria’s Secret, following in the footsteps of Valentina Sampaio, who announced she was modelling for the brand’s Pink campaign in August.
6795	The 29-year-old’s new song includes lyrics such as ‘why are you mad when you could be GLAAD?’ and ‘shade never made anybody less gay’.
6796	The 31-year-old says the assault charge is 'a big lie,' believing she has been targeted for her political views on the Islamic Republic and support of women's rights.
6797	The 33rd RQS specializes in rescuing personnel from hostile or austere situations.
6798	The £350 million project aims to create a world-class maritime hub.
6799	The 35th Annual Nordic American Thanksgiving Breakfast is Tuesday, Nov. 26 at DoubleTree by Hilton in Bloomington.
6800	The 43-year-old, who still keeps as keen an eye as he can on Scottish football from 5,000 miles away, has a rueful grin when he sees a weekend fixture list which includes tomorrow’s friendly between Rangers and Derby County at Ibrox.
6801	The 44-year-old was also keen to stress these kinds of acts were not a fair representation of the bar.
6802	The 500-person reduction will take place mainly in France, and more than 50% in the company’s telecommunications business, he said.
6803	The 5.7 percent increased Regional School Unit 40 budget was approved by all towns except Warren, whose residents voted 174 to 163 against the budget of $29,202,948.
6804	The 585-page draft EU-UK Withdrawal Agreement was translated into 110 pages of British legislation, which would need to be passed in Parliament by the end of this week (remember, the Brexit deadline is next Thursday, 31 October).
6805	The 70-year-old says he was once one of the “printers' devils” at the Queensland Government Printing Office in Brisbane when he began his four-year apprenticeship in 1964.
6806	The 74 invited participants are still being asked to volunteer as individuals and “subject-matter experts,” and not as representatives of their organizations or clients, which also troubled some River District board members.
6807	The 76-year-old, who announced his retirement last year from performing live after more than half a century of entertaining audiences, insisted his nerves had forced him to work harder.
6808	The 7.7% Monday move in Nomura's one-year price Momentum factor was the second-largest single-session drawdown in history going back to 1984, eclipsed only by a -8.2% bloodbath on April 4th, 2009.
6809	The 7th and 8th grade teams took losses from the Liberty Lady Eagles scoring, 48-14 and 53-26, respectively.
6810	The abdication date was later set as April 30 this year, to be followed by Crown Prince Naruhito’s succession the following day.
6811	The ability to capture screenshots may not be the iPad's most glamorous feature, but it's one of its most useful.
6812	“The abruptness of the decision making at the agency does not inspire confidence, in our view,” analyst Debjit Chattopadhyay wrote in a note to investors.
6813	The absence of plot and character also helps to shift perspective, to allow the viewer to register that changes are occurring, as they occur, from a vantage point that situates the changes within a larger whole.
6814	“The accused has been sent to judicial custody.
6815	The ACDP's Steven Swart described Mohlomi as "a royal queen like her name means in Latin".
6816	The ACLU wants Congress and state legislatures to impose restrictions.
6817	The acquisition may have helped boost the app but it also elicited concerns from the US government.
6818	The action started early, with the Nationals earning a run in the first inning and the Astros responding with two of their own, but that was the end of the Astros' scoring.
6819	The actor will be also seen in Raghava Lawrence’s Laxmmi Bomb opposite Akshay Kumar and Bhool Bhulaiyaa 2 alongside Kartik Aaryan.
6820	The actress followed the post up with a video to address men whyo sleep around and still ask for respect, say God will punish everyone of them.
6821	“The additional six reports date back to the summer of 2018, with three of the alleged assaults occurring in the same UNL dorm room,”
6822	The adjacent Eilat South Sea Nature Reserve was declared in 2002, and a third site, the Coral Sea Nature Reserve, was created in 2009.
6823	The administration’s lead budget and science policy shops released an outline of funding priorities to maintain America’s competitiveness through research and development of new technologies.
6824	The Advertiser previously reported about a resident who put up illegal road signs in a desperate attempt to warn motorists about the dangerous road that recently claimed two lives.
6825	The age and the gender of the victim was not revealed.
6826	The agency predicted that the Northern States would experience sunny and hazy conditions with day and night temperatures in the ranges of 31 to 37 and 13 to 20 degrees Celsius respectively.
6827	The aide to President Muhammadu Buhari on social media, Lauretta Onochie, has said that the security of Nigeria is far above the rights of any individual.
6828	The aircraft remains underwater off the coast of Guernsey in the English Channel.
6829	“The airplanes made victory possible for us.
6830	The AI:Trail has been unveiled as part of “a quartet of visionary vehicles,” possibly in a bid to make clear its green intentions for future generations of vehicles.
6831	THE ALABAMA WEEKEND: An upper trough will swing through Saturday, but for now the air looks too dry for any meaningful rain.
6832	The album wraps with “Melanin Melodies,” which illuminates Triiiple’s ability to flow and gives a powerful comment on social media, racial inequality and the Black Lives Matter Movement.
6833	The alerts said that the opposition political leader Moïse Katumbi Chapwe was planning to return to the D.R.C., after three years in exile.
6834	The Aligarh police say the child was strangled.
6835	The All-Star Category has three segments: Workforce/Education, Government/Operations and Industry/Technology.
6836	The altar, for Daphne and Laurel, is a substantial stand in their childhood home on which rests a massive dictionary.
6837	The ambulances are under government's "One million per constituency" policy which seeks to improve basic infrastructure at the constituency level.
6838	The AMD Ryzen 7 2700 is AMD's competitor to the Intel Core i7-8700 plus you're getting eight cores instead of only six.
6839	The amendment was withdrawn.
6840	The American independence celebrations, that will take place on Thursday, will not parade down Pennsylvania Avenue due to the risk of possible damages caused by the tanks on city roads.
6841	The American moral collapse personified by Trump is not “beautiful” or “phenomenal” or “incredible” or any of the president’s other clunky two-a-penny superlatives.
6842	The American Pocket Shark (Mollisquama mississippiensis) is only the second of its kind to be identified by marine scientists.
6843	The American Psychological Association recently published a research study that encapsulated over 20 years of research in 10 countries.
6844	The ammunition storage facility, believed to house tens of thousands of artillery shells, caught fire and exploded on Monday, killing one and injuring 13 others, as a result of "human error."
6845	The Andhra Pradeshs’ and Telanganas’ Chief Ministers also passed on their condolences.
6846	The Angels' designated hitter won the much-anticipated first stateside meeting between the stars, who also faced off five times in their domestic league.
6847	The anger at Kansas isn’t because cheating didn’t happen.
6848	The animal was lively and seemingly tame.
6849	The anniversary was held under the theme: "Hundred years of Methodism in Gomoa Ekwamkrom; the impact on the community and beyond”.
6850	The announcement came after Mr. Trump met with top North Korean official Kim Yong Chol in the Oval Office Friday afternoon.
6851	The announcement follows the US president’s announcement of new sanctions against Iran, while signalling his desire to avoid military conflict.
6852	The announcement is qualified good news for the U.S. manufacturing sector, which has spent decades in decline due to cost and speed advantages offered by Asian factories.
6853	The announcements may not stop at Apple’s TV and film ventures.
6854	The annual competition provides school learners and university students to understand the basics of investing by trading JSE-listed shares on a virtual trading platform.
6855	The annual contribution limit for employees who participate in 401(k), 403(b), most 457 plans and the federal government’s Thrift Savings Plan is $19,500 for 2020—a $500 boost over 2019.
6856	The annual event encourages people to play music in public places every 21 June.
6857	The annual event took place at the Town Hall, where the ‘Class of 2018’ gathered with family and teachers to be awarded certificates and tokens for the high marks they obtained in their final matric examinations.
6858	The annual pay gap figures are calculated from workforce earnings survey information collected by the Australian Bureau of Statistics.
6859	The annual Sharks Fun Day was held at the Jonsson Kings Park Stadium, recently, and consisted of exciting activities, food stalls and live entertainment.
6860	The answer depends, in part, on how much we think Mr. Trump, a real estate developer and son of a real estate developer, knows about the history of the conflict over the shape of the American city.
6861	The answer lies in the country's political system, which has failed to cement institutions that can support long-term development.
6862	The answers are part of the annual Tennessee Educator Survey, which was released this week.
6863	The answer to this question can be simply stated or it can be elaborated upon far beyond our available space.
6864	The anti-Israeli deputy FM Niels Annen (SPD) paid a congratulatory visit to the Iranian embassy in Berlin to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the revolution.
6865	The apex court will also hear the petitions seeking removal of other restrictions including communication blockade in the state which is coming in the way of journalists to carry out their professional duties.
6866	“The Apollo is about so much more than just music, it’s about how we used music and art to lift ourselves out of oppression,“ commented director Roger Ross Williams.
6867	The applicant, Alan Jewel (no relation to councillor Alan Jewell), seeks to build a small ground floor extension and carry out internal alterations to the building.
6868	The application is online and must be postmarked by Nov. 15 and mailed to the Wisconsin FFA Foundation office.
6869	The appointment of the 38-year-old son of former Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi was seen as an attempt by Abe to boost his popularity.
6870	The approved name has been announced and adopted by the Federal Executive Council today, 23rd October 2019.”
6871	The Arab Volunteering Union supports Arab youth in carrying out volunteer projects and activities in the Arab countries.
6872	The article is an excerpt from “K: A History of Baseball In Ten Pitches,” by Tyler Kepner, a New York Times sportswriter.
6873	The articles ran in the Herald and the Lowell Sun in January of this year.
6874	The artist found a way to weave trash and its stories into his art in the mid-2000s.
6875	The artist is able to paint anything at will without revealing any trace of effort.
6876	Theater-goers enjoy the cushy seats, lobster roll, loaded tater tots and drinks at iPic.
6877	The athletes’ energy expenditure started out relatively high, but inevitably plunged and flattened out at 2.5 times their basal metabolic rate for the remainder of the event.
6878	The Atlanta-based conference features teaching from Louie Giglio, Christine Caine, Matt Chandler, Chad Veach and more, with performances by artists including Kari Jobe, Lecrae, Trip Lee and Crowder.
6879	The atmosphere is so quiet you can imagine young Jack building the first two stories before the war began.
6880	The attacks unfolded on one of the hottest weekends of the year, with temperatures hitting 34C (93F) in west London.
6881	The attack was inspired by the so-called “hot water” challenge that has caused many injuries and even a death in the past couple of years, according to WYMT.
6882	The Audi rolled over and was sent careering down the road after the initial impact and was written off in the horror smash.
6883	The Auditorium is ADA Accessible.
6884	The au pair was detained because she had arrived on a tourist visa and faced questions about her intention to work in the country, leading Australian Border Force officials to place her in detention.
6885	The Australian Bureau of Statistics on Tuesday reported retail sales in July, which analysts and the government had expected to see lift on the back of tax cuts that started flowing into bank accounts from mid-July, fell 0.1 per cent.
6886	The authorities did not specify their nationalities.
6887	The authorities need to put a stop to harassment, intimidation and arbitrary arrests of activists, journalists and opposition members.”
6888	The authorities said they couldn’t let us (into Shopian) because of these attacks on trucks.
6889	The author was born Chloe Anthony Wofford on February 18, 1931, in Lorain, Ohio, the daughter of George and Ella Ramah Wofford, whom she often credited with instilling in her a love of the arts.
6890	The A.V. Club: Is that a late-night thing?
6891	The average 12 month price target among brokers that have covered the stock in the last year is $83.70.
6892	The average revenue per user which can be safely assumed once connectivity is in place.
6893	The awards gala is an event where Zimbabwe’s leading exporters in a range of categories will be recognized for their efforts and successes in reaching markets beyond our borders.
6894	The awards, including top coach, comeback player, best offensive and defensive players and rookies and assistant coach of the year, are voted on by a panel of 50 media members who extensively cover the NFL.
6895	The babe turned temperatures up even higher on her page by rocking a nearly non-existent bikini that left little to the imagination, driving her followers absolutely wild.
6896	The babies are then born live.
6897	The baker shared a side-by-side of her own “cake art” alongside Miley’s.
6898	“The banana industry, the banana crop is the only crop I know, right now that can provide that level of safety net to our farmers,” the minister added.
6899	The ban could contravene the principle of non-discrimination enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights, and may leave the Government open to legal challenge, Miss Reece warned.
6900	The band kept its music off streaming and download platforms.
6901	The band, whose name translates as “Night Project,” was founded 10 years ago by a group of architecture students at the American University of Beirut.
6902	The band will visit Houston again, likely sooner than later, but they'll bring larger amps and higher energies.
6903	The banjo steadies the beat, while electric guitar chords and a sort of songbird sound effect bristle underneath the surface.
6904	The bank at the corner of Main and Helen streets was robbed on February 23, 2019.
6905	The bank operates in more than 570 branches across Saudi Arabia as well as in Kuwait, Jordan and Malaysia.
6906	The Bass' exhibit "Campo Abierto," which translates to "open field," examines a number of landscapes — from social to environmental — in artist ' illustrious career.
6907	The baton contained the opening speech from the Queen sent from Buckingham Palace for the 11th Commonwealth Games, which she opened on Aug. 3, 1978, in Edmonton.
6908	“The battle continues with Hero Missions,” Blizzard said.
6909	“The ‘Battle for the Bone’ rivalry against St. Cloud State has been part of our football program for a long time.”
6910	The Battle Round features two artists on the same team performing a duet.
6911	The Bayelsa Deputy Governor, retired Rear Admiral John Jonah has urged Nigerians not to blame the army for its involvement in the 2019 general elections.
6912	The bench further told the NIA that it should make sure that “all these hurdles are cleared and trial is conducted smoothly”.
6913	The benefits include improved achievement in school and lower rates of obesity, hypertension and heart disease in adulthood.
6914	The best antidote to anxiety is action.
6915	“The best way to have zero emissions is to close the company, but then 18,000 people will lose their jobs.
6916	The BfV recently announced it is creating 300 new jobs to counter “right-wing extremism,” an acknowledgement of not only the threat but also of criticisms the agency has failed to prioritize the issue.
6917	The Bible became part of the missing man table honoring missing and POWS at the entranceway of the Manchester VA Medical Center.
6918	The biggest decrease in unemployment was seen among unqualified young people, which dropped from 25 percent in 2014 to 11 percent last year, and among young people with a migrant background, 18 percent in 2014 and 10 percent in 2018.
6919	The biggest donor was the United States, which traditionally stumps up around a third of the fund’s total budget - in 2016 it pledged $4.
6920	The biggest live 2am viewing figure was for the series’ opener super-fans stayed up to watch the episode live (up from for series S7 ep 1).
6921	The biggest thing for us is to just keep continuing to try and win and play a game that's built on effort."
6922	The big story for homeowners this week is the massive flooding in Arlington from that torrential rainstorm Monday morning that dropped 3.5-4.5 inches of water in just two hours.
6923	“The big thing that I think these guidelines do that I’m most excited about is they make it very systematically clear what you have to disclose … and make sure everything is transparent and everyone is aware and ready to tackle whatever is in the script.”
6924	The bill aims to tackle some of the issues facing the American healthcare system, most notably “surprise billing.”
6925	The bill also adds that if a lawsuit or complaint is filed against the school as a result of the display, the “attorney general shall provide legal representation at no cost.”
6926	The bill didn’t pass, but he has introduced it in every session since then.
6927	The Billion Group CEO and Spirit Embassy: GoodNews Church founder has bought a 140 acre island in Uganda.
6928	The Bill titled: “National Commission for the Prohibition of Hate Speeches (Establishment, etc) Bill, 2019” is being sponsored by the Deputy Chief Whip of the Senate who is also the Senator representing Niger North, Aliyu Sabi Abdullahi.
6929	The binary sex model not only insufficiently predicts the presence of hormones but is useless in describing factors that influence them.
6930	The biopic is being directed by Jeevan Reddy and the film’s team, in a statement, said that most students today are unaware of the ideals George stood for and their intention is to narrate the story of the forgotten hero.
6931	The biotechnology company reported ($0.63) EPS for the quarter, beating analysts’ consensus estimates of ($0.65) by $0.02.
6932	The Bison can almost taste the current FCS record of 33 straight wins (also held by the Herd).
6933	The BJP MP returned without arguing with the villagers and no complaint has been filed in the matter either.
6934	The BJP winners are Aparajita Sarangi from Bhubaneswar and Sangeeta Singhdeo from Bolangir.
6935	The Bladen Journal, the Department of Social Services and Leinwand’s on West Broad Street are again partnering to bring the Christmas-time assistance to Bladen County.
6936	The blast killed one firefighter and sent six others to the hospital.
6937	The blog states California Adventure guests will “become part of an interconnected, global story,” as an “Avengers Campus” is also being built at Disneyland Paris.
6938	The Blood Bank promotion was only available during the event and ended on September 27th.
6939	The board charged with oversight of for-profit college was eliminated under former Gov. Scott Walker, but Evers is seeking to beef up the state’s regulatory muscle.
6940	The board criticised a series of decisions by Uber that it said were the result of "ineffective safety culture" at the time.
6941	The board is also taking steps to try and be the first in line to get approval and funding for a new tower.
6942	"The board of education are huge liars.
6943	The body was sent for post-mortem.
6944	The book was nominated for the Pulitzer Prize and has been adapted to both films and TV series.
6945	The Boomerang to Bangkok took Tanqueray gin and mixed it with a Thai-defining, coconut-lime leaf cordial plus ginger and green cardamom for obvious aromatic and spice qualities.
6946	The booster is also based on the Minotaur 4 rocket used to launch small satellites into orbit.
6947	The border patrol rounds up undocumented Haitian immigrants in Nassau on Sept. 30. Two days later, Prime Minister Hubert Minnis announced that Haitians in the Bahamas without documentation would be deported.
6948	The Boston Bar Association did a service reminding us last week about what is at stake.
6949	“The Boston Red Sox won the World Series in 2018 and their attendance dropped – why?” asked Boras.
6950	The boys would do it.
6951	The brain learns to associate drug paraphernalia or the physical location of drug partaking in the context of receiving a drug.
6952	The brand added a video that shows a dark-skinned model’s hand and arm that’s full of tattoos.
6953	The break in the barrier was due to an issue with the material used to build it.
6954	The Brexit Party, which topped the vote in the European Parliament election in the UK on May 23, did not field candidates in local elections in England on May 2, following its establishment in January.
6955	The bridge has been in failing condition for several years and was closed, forcing Buhler school buses to find a different route to Prairie Hills Middle School.
6956	The brigadier general said the Army overtook some AA camps on April 28 and 30 near Buthidaung Township.
6957	The brokerage issued an overweight rating and a $18.00 price objective on the stock.
6958	'The brutal and sustained attack that officers have come under while trying to make our community safe is disgusting.
6959	The B Singles Draw was played by senior Miguel, Este (Caracas, Venezuela) and senior Juan Lugo (Maracay, Venezuela).
6960	The Buddies got at Aberdeen down the flanks, took a lead then defended with ease.
6961	The buildings would be three-bedroom, single-level homes consistent with a previous housing study.
6962	The Bureau of Land Management, part of the U.S. Department of the Interior, decides whether or not mineral leases are renewed.
6963	The burned trees and new growth offer some cover from air surveillance.
6964	The business also recently disclosed a monthly dividend, which will be paid on Monday, April 15th.
6965	The business had revenue of $0.03 million for the quarter, compared to analyst estimates of $0.03 million.
6966	The business had revenue of $1.19 billion during the quarter, compared to the consensus estimate of $1.10 billion.
6967	The business had revenue of $2.50 million for the quarter, compared to analysts’ expectations of $2.50 million.
6968	The business had revenue of $691.00 million during the quarter, compared to analyst estimates of $812.52 million.
6969	The business had revenue of $74.54 million during the quarter, compared to analyst estimates of $70.81 million.
6970	The business is scheduled to report its next earnings results on Wednesday, October 30th.
6971	The businessman has been approached by several pupils whose parents are either deceased, unemployed or just poverty stricken to afford the soaring education costs.
6972	The business’s revenue for the quarter was up 35.6% on a year-over-year basis.
6973	The business’s revenue was up 13.7% compared to the same quarter last year.
6974	The cameraman rushes to safety in a nearby restaurant.
6975	The cameras are triggered to capture data as a vehicle passes the bus while children are entering and exiting.
6976	The campaign also parted ways with its political director in Iowa, according to a report that surfaced later in the week.
6977	The camps, sprawled over about 6,000 acres – just under half the size of Manhattan – have become more organised but recent police activity suggested the risk of being trafficked has increased due to the promise of work and better lives.
6978	The Canadian central bank also that it would not be raising or lower interest rates, which helped strengthen the Canadian dollar.
6979	The candidate is in her fifth year of teaching business classes at John F. Kennedy High School in Winston-Salem.
6980	The candidates can download the admit card through the official website- licindia.
6981	The Canyon of Heroes has been used to celebrate many people and events, including the Apollo 11 astronauts and the completion of the Brooklyn Bridge.
6982	The cardiovascular disease, which includes heart attacks and angina, kills around 2,600 women in Scotland each year - roughly seven every day - with 100,000 said to be living with the condition.
6983	The Caribbean Community says that the labelling as “non-cooperative tax jurisdictions” has wreaked irreparable reputational damage on our small, highly vulnerable Member States.
6984	The Carolina Waterfowl Rescue is asking women to remove the eye closures from the fasteners on their bras and mail them in. The eye closures are used to help wire the shells of turtles back together.
6985	The car owner walked down the street, and one lady stopped by what she thought was the car.
6986	The Cars Frontman Ric Ocasek DiesGet KEEL on Google Home!
6987	The case before the Court turns on a pretty narrow question of law.
6988	The case dates back almost five years to a 2014 complaint from a woman who rides a van the city provides to transport people with disabilities.
6989	The case of Kris Dunn has been a curious one.
6990	The case will now be given to UEFA's Control, Ethics and Disciplinary Body with the date of their meeting yet to be confirmed.
6991	“The casual racism of the moment was pretty obvious.
6992	The catch is, the jobs were contingent on buying pricey photo packages from a specific photographer, taking expensive acting classes and spending money in a variety of ways.
6993	The CBA requires the establishment of a four-person pool of arbitrators, with one of them assigned (presumably randomly) to handle each non-injury grievance.
6994	The CBS 2 Investigators have confirmed that Medicare recipients continue to get medical brace scam solicitations.
6995	The Cedar River remains high and turbid; no reports at this time.
6996	The celebration of the subjective is the unique gift of the humanities.
6997	The center in itself is a great way to serve the community and is just one of the ways in which we invest in stewardship.
6998	The center is scheduled to officially open on Tuesday, Dec. 3 at 9 a.m. Refreshments will be served alongside a ribbon-cutting ceremony and a table tennis tournament.
6999	The central government has been granting proposals which will make Indian Army more powerful, potent and well-equipped to tackle any misadventure by our enemy.
7000	The centre said on its Facebook page: “Did you fall hook, line, and sinker for someone who broke your heart?
7001	The Centre’s decision to give its disinvestment programme a steroid shot by selling off controlling stakes in healthy PSUs to private firms has drawn extreme reactions.
7002	The ceremony around the Queen's speech is laced with tradition – one of them is the Labour MP Dennis Skinner heckling Black Rod as she tells the Speaker of the House of Commons that the Queen has commanded MPs to attend her in the House of Lords.
7003	The ceremony for the Un Certain Regard prizes took place last night, May 24. Un Certain Regard is a section of the Cannes Film Festival, which runs parallel to the films selected for competition for the Palme d’Or.
7004	The chair landed in front of the entrance to a building, according to Toronto police.
7005	The chairman expressed the hope that the conversation at the two-day summit would lead to concrete suggestions towards reducing these “anomalous practices and processes that fuel corruption and undermine the development aspirations of the country’’.
7006	The chairman of the forum and Governor of Ekiti State, Dr Kayode Fayemi, stated this while briefing newsmen at the end of the meeting of the forum held in Abuja.
7007	“The challenge is doing it right,” a worker said.
7008	The Chan brothers have since engaged in a legal battle against the CRA, hoping to block tax auditors from reviewing an additional 1,000-plus documents in KPMG's possession, arguing that they are protected by solicitor-client privilege.
7009	The Chancellor also alarmed Brexit-backers by warning that the UK faces a potentially lengthy delay to leaving, and that the Tories may have to compromise and back a customs union.
7010	The changes over the past two years have upset some of Sun Country’s longtime customers, who mostly fly in and out of the airline’s hometown hub, MSP.
7011	The changes will cut down on wait time while making the service easier to understand for new riders.
7012	The change was confirmed after AIBA updated its uniform guidelines.
7013	The Channel 13 poll published Thursday showed Netanyahu’s Likud catching up to Gantz’s Blue and White, with both slated to win 30 seats.
7014	The character is a cyborg and in the comics everybody can tell.
7015	The charge carries a maximum sentence of up to 5 years in prison.
7016	The charity had on Friday warned that the boat was running low on supplies.
7017	The Chicago mayor and the city’s teachers union say a strike that has cancelled classes for 11 days has been suspended and that classes will resume Friday.
7018	The Chief Minister also claimed that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) will win more seats in Uttar Pradesh in the coming Lok Sabha elections than it did in 2014.
7019	The Chief Minister announced a worldclass museum in Sivaganga district’s Konthagai village at an estimated cost of Rs 12.21 crore to showcase the ancient artefacts unearthed during the recent excavations at Keezhadi.
7020	The Chinese as a great people are not going to accept that America’s going to be the superpower of the world.
7021	The Chinese detention camps are a terrifyingly similar parallel to the concentration camps of the Holocaust.
7022	The Chinese government’s announcement came on the same day that Huawei signed a deal with Russian telecoms firm MT to work on 5G technology in Russia.
7023	The Chinese University of Hong Kong declared the rest of its semester would be cancelled for safety reasons.
7024	The choice is too often not a free one.
7025	The choice to keep Jeremy Corbyn away from Downing Street, to stop him getting his hands on the levers of national security and defence, has to be to vote Conservative in this election, and that’s what I’ll be doing as well.”
7026	The Chugach was called on by other state and federal agencies.
7027	"The circumstances are being investigated and the motive is yet to be established," said Traut.
7028	The City Council voted to decline recreational sales at their October 7 council meeting.
7029	The city in 2011 awarded contracts for the five garbage-collection zones.
7030	The City invites everyone to attend the second public open house to review and provide feedback on the draft vision statement, overarching goals, and strategies.
7031	The city was able to use these initial state allocations to purchase smaller properties within the clear zone, but the large-scale incremental funding now available through the cooperative agreement will allow for the purchase of larger parcels.
7032	The CJN revealed that the Supreme Court, being the highest and final court in the land, is always very critical and conscious of every case that comes before it on appeal.
7033	The Clintons' best friend!' he marveled.
7034	The clip, which was soundtracked by a presidential score, also included footage of Cole’s 2018 interview with Lil Pump.
7035	“The closest I have seen to the great man.
7036	The closing continues the demise of alternative print publications across the nation, including some of its biggest names.
7037	The clothes are symbolic of the past and how we deal with the past and move to the present and future.
7038	The “Clout” rapper is seen holding onto Cardi’s thighs as his tongue is out in the photo.
7039	"The (club) has learned that Taylor Swift is now unable to make the trip to Australia and therefore cannot be with us on Melbourne Cup Day," he said.
7040	The clubs were designated Healthy North Dakota 4-H Clubs for the year and eight were also recognized for completing the Family Mealtime Challenge.
7041	The club will give him time to develop his squad but he’ll know the sooner he gets first win the sooner he’ll have to deal with questions about his ability to manage a club of Chelsea’s stature.
7042	“The coach made it clear on his first day in training that football is a simple business and that he is going to introduce one or two tactics,” he said.
7043	The co-chairs for the combined board of directors strongly support the merger and are looking forward to what it means for the people of Colorado.
7044	The coconut oil in the pre-shave oil, shaving foam (pictured above), and after-shave intimate balm ensure that your skin stays smooth and irritation-free after a close shave.
7045	The coffee chain is to convert the former Pizza Hut restaurant on Gallagher Retail Park.
7046	“The cold truth is that the nation’s overall infrastructure grade, as of 2017, is a D+ according to the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE),” reports International Business Times.
7047	The collaboration between Campagnolo Chef Robert Belcham and La Palma (Toronto) Chef Craig Harding is sure to be one that’s as full of personality as it is in big Italian-inspired flavours.
7048	The Colonials have played a cleaner game this season too, accumulating 157 errors to their opponents’ 215.
7049	The Colonials return to the pitch Wednesday in another A-10 face-off at St. Bonaventure.
7050	The colony hosts a total of ten different species of bats, with at least eighteen thousand Miniopterus Schreibersi (common bent-wing) bats hanging out in the cave and using it as their permanent home.
7051	The comedy will be very much in tune with what’s going on … and it’s very interactive.”
7052	The Comets got as close as the 37, 28 and 18 in their three remaining first-half drives but were unable to add to the lead.
7053	The commissioners approved the contract with Husker Steel and Norfolk Construction for the bridge located at the junction of Dewberry Road and 300th Street.
7054	The committee’s top Republican, Rep. Jim Jordan of Ohio, called Cohen a “fraudster, cheat” and “a convicted felon.”
7055	The committee voted the put the legislation in a study resolution following an outcry of hunters on Sunday, who raised concerns of the handling of the legislation.
7056	“The community support continues.
7057	“The community that they have around and how they rallied around their people, I finally felt welcomed, and that I was able to be a part of something,” Winterfield said.
7058	The companies are reviewed based on their closing balances at the end of trading session on Thursday, September 12, 2019.
7059	The company also recently announced a quarterly dividend, which was paid on Friday, March 8th.
7060	The company also said in a statement on its Facebook page that it was assessing the Sorrento site for damage following Thursday morning’s severe weather.
7061	The company currently has an average rating of “Buy” and an average target price of $40.
7062	The company declined to comment because it is in a quiet period in connection with the filing.
7063	The company had met FIIs in December to explain its stand," Sameer Kalra, Equity Research Analyst and Founder of Target Investing, told ET.
7064	The company had revenue of $23.66 billion during the quarter, compared to the consensus estimate of $24.66 billion.
7065	The company had revenue of $3.26 million for the quarter, compared to the consensus estimate of $4.51 million.
7066	The company had sold 46,848 units in the same month last year, M&M said in a statement.
7067	The company has a 50 day moving average of $33.11 and a two-hundred day moving average of $26.13.
7068	The company has a current ratio of 0.71, a quick ratio of 0.71 and a debt-to-equity ratio of 0.98.
7069	The company has a debt-to-equity ratio of 0.42, a quick ratio of 3.15 and a current ratio of 4.05.
7070	The company has a debt-to-equity ratio of 0.68, a quick ratio of 1.49 and a current ratio of 1.49.
7071	The company has a debt-to-equity ratio of 179.03, a quick ratio of 0.73 and a current ratio of 0.95.
7072	The company has a debt-to-equity ratio of 2.38, a current ratio of 1.77 and a quick ratio of 1.76.
7073	The company has a fifty day moving average of $43.93.
7074	The company has a market capitalization of $188.36 million, a price-to-earnings ratio of 10.79 and a beta of 1.40.
7075	The company has a market cap of $360.85 million and a PE ratio of 43.60.
7076	The company has a quick ratio of 1.42, a current ratio of 2.49 and a debt-to-equity ratio of 1.02.
7077	The company has strategic partnership with DMI to support clients in navigating the burgeoning conversational commerce category.
7078	“The company intends to bring a grief counsellor to help our employees cope with this tragic loss.
7079	The company is evaluating voxelotor in SCD in a Phase III clinical trial in adult and adolescent patients with SCD.
7080	The company is planning a phased release to make sure the game remains reliable as new users jump on board.
7081	The Company offers software as a service based platform PagerDuty, which helps developers, DevOps, information technology operations and business to prevent and resolve business impacting incidents.
7082	The company operates in three segments: Transportation, Facilities, and Supply and Logistics.
7083	The company plans to launch version two of the education tool later this year.
7084	The company purchased the pig ears from a single supplier in Brazil from September 2018 through August 2019.
7085	The company reported $0.05 earnings per share for the quarter, missing the consensus estimate of $0.09 by ($0.04).
7086	The company reported ($0.79) earnings per share (EPS) for the quarter, beating the consensus estimate of ($0.88) by $0.09.
7087	The company reported ($1.93) earnings per share for the quarter, missing the Thomson Reuters’ consensus estimate of ($1.50) by ($0.43), reports.
7088	The company said it wants to keep expanding the program.
7089	The company says its system is far greener, with a lower carbon footprint, than having rubbish collected by the council and carted off to be buried in landfill or burned for electricity in a commercial incinerator.
7090	The company’s stock had a trading volume of 15,105 shares, compared to its average volume of 1,265,673.
7091	The company’s stock had a trading volume of 183,965 shares, compared to its average volume of 11,065,834.
7092	The company’s stock had a trading volume of 3,150,086 shares, compared to its average volume of 1,630,169.
7093	The company’s stock had a trading volume of 9,610 shares, compared to its average volume of 971,634.
7094	The company stuck with the low-friction sign-up system, even as violence increased.
7095	The company traded as high as $4.77 and last traded at $4.70, approximately 5,517,253 shares traded hands during mid-day trading.
7096	The company was founded in 1906 and is headquartered in Dallas, Texas.
7097	The complainant then went and met Dahiya but failed to get relief, following which he approached the then Additional Commissioner of Police Chhering Dorje, who then ordered police to register a case 55 days after the incident.
7098	“The complete concept for Loidé Oils & Vinegars is the offering of a way to consume clean, health foods,” Hensel wrote in her business plan.
7099	The comprehensive service fee is comprised of the health and counseling fee, transportation fee, and technology fee.
7100	The ‘computer says no’ assessment that deemed Jaxon’s needs ‘not severe enough’ is clearly not fit for purpose.
7101	"The concern is that the building will be vandalized," Des Moines City Manager Scott Sanders said.
7102	The concert had opened with a suite drawn from the 1992 Disney film Aladdin.
7103	The Congress also claimed that some leaders, who had never held any official position in the government, have got better security and vehicles compared to party leaders who remained ministers, parliamentarians and legislators.
7104	The Congress had won 44 seats in the House.
7105	The congressman’s closest electoral challenge came in last year’s midterms, when the Democrat J. D. Scholten, a former Minor League baseball player and paralegal, lost to King by just three percentage points.
7106	The consequences of long-term underinvestment are being flagged - repeatedly - at the highest level.
7107	The Conservative peer said the malaise was due to the weather rather than woes as demand had been much stronger in parts of the UK, such as Scotland, where it had been cooler.
7108	The Conservative People's Party of Estonia (EKRE) introduced its election platform on Saturday.
7109	"The Conservatives handed our servicemen and women a real-terms pay cut for seven years running.
7110	“The Constitution of Zimbabwe Amendment (No. 20) Act, 2013 defines youths as people between the ages of 15 to 35 years.
7111	The contract amendments will be funded by the Salado ISD, village administrator Don Ferguson told aldermen.
7112	The cost of finding sand with his tee shot, then forcing his third into the green, sending it well right.
7113	The cost of living is soaring; a litre of milk has risen from Z$7.50 to $25 in the space of a few months.
7114	The costume seems to be inspired by one of Stassi’s icons, Marie Antoinette.
7115	The cost will shoot up if you add the upkeep expenses like hiring a cleaner.
7116	The council is hoping for a $10 million or more contribution from the state government for the project, after having secured a $10 million promise from the federal government.
7117	The council said the opening of a PRC regional office in Region 12 “will greatly benefit local professionals, especially through reduced travel time and costs in securing and renewing their professional licenses.”
7118	The country is in the midst of protests over massive fuel price rises.
7119	The country's biggest arts competitions was attended by Information minister, Monica Mutsvangwa and her husband, former Zimbabwean ambassador to China, Chris Mutsvangwa.
7120	The couple emailed mastermind William Rick Singer in 2016 about their daughters college prospects, stating that they wanted to do the necessary work to see that the girls got into USC as opposed to ASU.
7121	The couple got into a furious row on their way to Cancun, Mexico.
7122	The course is between Carson City and Reno on Lighting W Ranch Road.
7123	The court did not indicate when the rehearing would happen.
7124	The court heard 12 people saw a lone woman matching Ms Glennon's description walking away from the Continental Hotel on March 15, 1997, including a group referred to as the "burger boys" who told her she was "crazy to hitchhike".
7125	The court heard she recruited a male to pose as the child's father and travelled to Golders Green, north-west London, while the child's parents were away.
7126	The CPCB figures on average AQI were available only for 100 cities, and as such people expressed the need for proper data collection in smaller towns and cities.
7127	The craziest thing about these small, furry creatures is that their closest living relative is the elephant.
7128	The criterion for taking in a new book is they (authors) should have a good message to put out there.
7129	The crowd takes in the final open mic night at Suzy’s on Aviation Boulevard.
7130	The Crusaders were coming off their first tournament berth in three seasons, and just the second in the program’s eight-year history, but already were faced with the challenge of replacing graduated all-time leading scorer Amanda Blanchette.
7131	The CS said that stringent entry rules, such as installation of machines and coolers for peeling and freezing the Hass avocados before exportation, had been revoked by the Chinese government.
7132	The currency, which FMIC estimated to trade at P54 to a dollar this year, ended 2018 at P52.58 versus the greenback, down sharply from its 2017 close of P49.
7133	The current court is forcing the issue.
7134	The current system of selecting an auditor is problematic.
7135	The custom range hood is by Weld-Wright.
7136	The CWC resolution further said that the Congress would continue to play a constructive role to overcome these serious challenges, as it hoped that the new government will address these issues as its top priority.
7137	The Czech Republic’s state prosecutor changed his opinion and halted an investigation of PM Andrej Babiš and his family for alleged EU subsidies fraud.
7138	The Daily Bruin remains committed to the mission of reporting on the campus and community.
7139	The daily service will be reduced to four times a week during the Dubai Airport Southern Runway closure.
7140	The damage, to both individual and company reputations, can be significant.
7141	The damage to the cars was also confirmed by court expert Joseph Zammit and insurance surveyors.
7142	The Danielsons, who live in Long Prairie right now, plan to move to Osakis soon.
7143	The data on murders is only one part of a much larger picture of violence made complicated by poor data collection procedures.
7144	The day after Thanksgiving has been regarded as the beginning of America’s Christmas shopping season since 1952, although the term “Black Friday” did not become widely used until more recent decades.
7145	The day itself saw an official turnout of 1459 guests passing through the gates with an additional 312 children.
7146	The day was also marked by special rituals such as ‘Vasanthotsavam’ and ‘Asthanam’ to the deities in the afternoon at the Ranganayakula Mandapam inside the temple.
7147	The DCI complained to the committee that the four never heeded the summons.
7148	The deadline for filing the ACTIVE has been extended twice and the Government has now decided that there will be no more extensions, sources added.
7149	The deal which was signed last week, allows South Sudanese to travel to Kenya without paying for a visa.
7150	The death is the 87th traffic-related fatality in Metropolitan police jurisdiction in 2019.
7151	The death of Mugabe at a top Singaporean hospital on September 6, as well as the subsequent ugly tussling with the government over where he was to be buried, has put question marks over the future of his widow and children.
7152	The deceased child’s family told investigators that, one week before his death, he had fallen off a couch at the family’s home.
7153	The decline in headline sales values came despite a near-2% m/m rise in gasoline station sales, following the 6.3% m/m surge in prices last month.
7154	The DeepMind scientists found a way to make it work, though, thanks to a system that learns from observation in a simulated environment (MuJoCo) and transfers its learnings to the real world.
7155	The defeat of the Mother of the Nation in the presidential election on January 2, 1965 was an agonizing event for millions.
7156	The Defendant (Sowore) was not remanded by Court order yesterday.
7157	The defendants were arrested and taken into custody and the offences of possession of firearm of ammunition were pointed out to them.
7158	The defending champion Knights will face the Unity (Saskatchewan) Cardinals this afternoon at 1:15 PT in its opener.
7159	The delay had nothing to do with the April fire at the facility, officials said.
7160	The demand for PAWS reflects the enormous need for pet care in Englewood.
7161	The demonstrators who have filled parks and streets regularly since early June want democratic reforms to Hong Kong’s government and an independent inquiry into police actions against protesters.
7162	The department in the past three months has received 32 complaints, leading to eight Metro police being dismissed.
7163	The department is diligent in monitoring the challenges of teacher recruitment, which is a national issue.
7164	The Department is partnering with law enforcement agencies nationwide in the “Drive Sober or Get Pulled Over” enforcement campaign over Labor Day weekend.
7165	The Department of Housing and Urban Development, which enforces the Fair Housing Act, is also the only cabinet department currently headed by a black person.
7166	The Department of State confirmed Gobright’s death on Thursday.
7167	The deportees were never able to return to their homes.
7168	The deputy commissioner said the duty of government officials was to respond to the grievances of the public.
7169	The deputy has also worked with the schools coordinating ‘Alert, Lockdown, Inform, Counter, Evacuate’ (ALICE) training sessions to help school personnel and first responders prepare for intruder/shooter scenarios at each district.
7170	The design process for this has already begun, and in early spring the city will begin the public engagement phase.
7171	The detailed design will happen through May and June with construction slated to begin in August, lasting roughly 10-weeks.
7172	The development of battery technology will also have a significant impact on our ability to move towards greater electrification.
7173	The Diamondbacks and Cardinals played the longest game at Chase Field on Tuesday â€“ and into early Wednesday morning.
7174	The difference comes in whether actual weapons are constructed: “We didn’t see a need for it.
7175	The dinner is $75, which includes tax and gratuities.
7176	The dish is finally garnished with chopped green onions that highlight a freshness that you will not confuse this plate with anything in your freezer.
7177	The dispute began earlier this year whenPresident Trump declared a national emergency in order to secure funding for his signature immigration policy: the border wall.
7178	The District of Columbia legalized it in 2016.
7179	The Divisional Police Officer in that area is on ground now and the area is under control.”
7180	‘The documents that have been produced to date raise concerns that HHS is holding back significant amounts of relevant information.’
7181	The DOH will also offer free HPV vaccination to Grade 4 students.
7182	The Dow lost 285 points, closing down 1%, at 26,118.
7183	The draft bill has been concluded and it will be presented to this August house for the first reading by 2nd April 2019.
7184	The Dreamcast was a lovely thing and seemed to have a lot of promise, but by then it was too late for them and Sony took their scalp almost like it was nothing on their unstoppable march to the top.
7185	The Drive has received reports of power outages near Grasmere.
7186	The driver, 35 year-old Christopher Lee Spencer of Highway 39 North, Selma, was detained.
7187	The driver failed field sobriety tests and was arrested for DUI.
7188	The driver of the tractor-trailer was unable to avoid colliding with the Chevrolet Traverse, which was then pushed across all of the lanes on the road and into the concrete median.
7189	The drug court program takes more than a year to complete.
7190	The drug doesn’t halt progressive loss of memory, it just slows it down.
7191	The DSX leverage calculation is not exactly comparable to SB.
7192	The duke continued, saying that while "no one is perfect", "we are all responsible for our own individual impact".
7193	THE DUKE of Edinburgh ignored pleas from his police protection officers to ride with him before he crashed his car, sources said last night.
7194	The duty of the third-partycontractor will be to conduct regular checks on the constructed roads.
7195	The Eagles did display some good offensive execution down the stretch, but are left wondering what could have been with just one more defensive stop.
7196	The early part of the game was dominated by the Bears’ defense and by Tumbarello’s kicking.
7197	The earnings per share stood at ₹65.82 (₹30.31).
7198	The ECI letter came in response to a resolution passed by the House on November 27, 2018, wherein it was alleged the CEO office had “suo-motu” deleted names of thousands of voters, without following due norms to “favour a particular political party”.
7199	The Economic and Financial Crimes Commission is prosecuting Mba alongside former NBC director of finance, Patrick Areh, alleged owner of Technology Advisor, Basil Udotai, and Babatunji Amure, alleged owner of Divine Partners and Technology Advisors.
7200	The Edin/Shaefer research provided support for the idea that that change is necessary; the Meyer research removes one potential rationale for it.
7201	The editorial expresses disapproval of Omar’s comments about Graham, but it can’t resist the temptation to place them in the context of Trump tweets and statements by former Rep. Michele Bachmann.
7202	The education ministry said in a statement today that the schools were ordered to close after the air pollutant index (API) reading in the area exceeded 200.
7203	The effects of slavery in East Africa are not as severe as the economic consequences of Western colonization of Africa, says N'Diaye.
7204	The effects of the visit don’t stop there though.
7205	The Eight Sleep app features daily reports about users' sleep, guided meditation and more.
7206	The elected provincial councils and local government authorities were to be legally obliged to seek approval from the unelected Jana Sabhas to launch any project.
7207	The election authority sent ballot boxes to polling stations ahead of the vote.
7208	The Election Commission of India (ECI) working with social media and insta-messaging platforms to put curbs on use of these to influence voting decisions, thus, is a welcome move.
7209	The electorate needed time after the 2016 ‘People’s Vote’ to absorb the difficulties and problems relating to leaving the EU.
7210	The electronics maker reported $0.70 EPS for the quarter, beating the Thomson Reuters’ consensus estimate of $0.52 by $0.18.
7211	The emails asked victims for confirmation for a recent transaction, along with a link to a malicious PHP file.
7212	The Emerging Producers section at the Ji.hlava Intl.
7213	The emphasis on feminism that only benefits upper-middle class white American women is alarming.
7214	The employee has since been terminated by the contractor.”
7215	The employees are expected to move BSNL management, through various unions, seeking early disbursal of salary.
7216	The Employee Scheduling Software sales will reach about 530.87 Million USD in 2023 from 251.18 Million USD in 2017 all around the world, with the CAGR of 13.28%.
7217	The energy commodity put in a bullish reversal trading pattern on Friday, December 6, in the aftermath of OPEC’s policy announcement.
7218	The engine delivers an output of 489 hp and 700 Nm of torque, but the ISG system temporarily generates an additional 250 Nm of torque and 22 hp of power offering EQ boost for effortless acceleration and fuel savings.
7219	The entire tech conflict is just one dimension of a larger fight that now characterizes the icy and escalating trade war between the United States and China.
7220	The Epic Saga Of How A Single two-inch Fish Saved A Population — New research explores how the Gulf Killifish adapted to deadly pollution in the Houston Ship Channel.
7221	The episode is dark and even a little creepy for a Pooh plot.
7222	The episode simply reveals supporting evidence for what many economists and scientists have long expected of the irrigation infrastructure program.
7223	“The equipment itself must be worth in the region of £1,000.
7224	The European Council President has no business there."
7225	The European duo of Georgia Hall and Celine Boutier defeated Americans Ally McDonald and Angel Yin 2 up.
7226	The evacuated people, mostly fisherfolk, were resettled in a nearby place called Pallithura, where a new church was built by the DAE.
7227	The event brought Muller right back to his early childhood memories of watching wrestling greats like the Ultimate Warrior and Hulk Hogan, except this time, the action was happening right in front of him.
7228	The event was attended by several cast members as well as entertainers in Hollywood.
7229	The event was organized to introduce opera to locals and tourists alike.
7230	The event will be held at Golden Willow, 412 Sipapu Road, Taos.
7231	The event will conclude with the Midwest premiere of panelist and Ohio State alumna Jennifer Reeder’s film, “Knives and Skin,” followed by a Q&A session with Reeder.
7232	The event will include small bites and drinks, a karaoke band, Mardi Gras face painters, unlimited boat rides, and a DJ.
7233	The ever-smiling actress always manages to get her sartorial choices on point.
7234	The excerpt was released during the first day of public impeachment hearings into whether Donald Trump abused his power during a phone call made in July this year.
7235	The Executive Director Projects, Dr. Caro Ojugbouh once said that the NNDC owes “phantom” contractors and that 12,000 contract jobs had been abandoned.
7236	The exhibit and event are cosponsored by the HHRC and the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence.
7237	The existing backstop would require Northern Ireland – and possibly the whole United Kingdom – to continue to follow many EU rules if future trade talks break down, in order to avoid customs checks on the Ireland-Northern Ireland border.
7238	The exploitation of Mother Nature in the name of economic advancement is just lazy.
7239	The expressway joins four main highways – Delhi-Jaipur Road, Gurgaon-Nuh-Alwar Road, Palwal-Sohna-Rewari Road, and Delhi-Agra Road.
7240	The extensive cocktail list includes classics and house creations, many of which feature the Maison Selby line of Dillon’s Distillery products.
7241	The extraction procedure now is called CO2 extraction.
7242	The Facebook event’s creator had already disavowed the whole thing and the page was taken down.
7243	The facilities can host up to 800 people and we already have 2,000 — some of them are on the beach with a blanket and a sheet,” he protested.
7244	The facility must close if it is unable to find a buyer.
7245	"The fact I put it on the line the last time Max and I were supposed to meet up, that holds some weight.
7246	“The fact is this — Albertans spoke on April 16 loud and clear.
7247	The facts: economic growth has drastically reduced, cost of living has increased beyond the reach of many.
7248	The fact that he got it now proves that he was right.
7249	'The fact that the patient has spoken to a solicitor with a view to legal action will not prevent us from reviewing his case and learning from the findings.'
7250	“The failure of Serco to come up with any serious progress in key talks yesterday leaves us with no choice but to go ahead with our industrial action exactly as planned.”
7251	The Falcons hadn’t allowed a touchdown in 10 consecutive quarters going into the game against Tampa Bay.
7252	“The family are not moving today or any other day.”
7253	The family then moves off, with the adult elephant still carrying the calf's body.
7254	The family will receive friends from 5-7 p.m., Tuesday, March 19, 2019 at the Gate City Funeral Home.
7255	The fans are pretty easygoing.
7256	The fans are very loyal.
7257	The fans seemed to have recovered their ability to move.
7258	The farthest distance between stadiums here is 47 miles from Surprise Stadium to Hohokam Stadium in Mesa.
7259	The FBI are said to be looking to 'several' potential victims in the hope that they can provide more detail.
7260	The fear of it not being accepted by the American audience cannot be used as an excuse.
7261	The feasibility of framing and formulating the singularity of nature has proved impossible to accomplish scientifically so far.
7262	The Federal Government should rather rally the other affected African nations to take a collective action whenever any of their citizens is extra-judiciously targeted in the future.
7263	The feds are surrounded.
7264	The festival was announced in January, but it was far from ready.
7265	The feudal mindset of the society which doesn’t like women coming to the mainstream also has a role in the harassment faced by them, she added.
7266	The field has become dynamic, challenging and highly competitive,” said Pro Vice-Chancellor Professor Ravindra Kulkarni.
7267	The field is extremely weak, and most of the guys will just be gambling and enjoying the resort.
7268	The fighters were cordial enough at the weigh-in.
7269	The figure is small compared to Labour's promised £83 billion increase in spending, paid for by higher taxes on big businesses and the highest 5% of earners.
7270	The Fijian PM accused Scott Morrison of being "condescending" over Australia's relationship with Fiji.
7271	The film also features the likes of: Angela Davis, Hilton Als, Fran Lebowitz, Walter Mosley, Sonia Sanchez, and Farah Griffin, some of whom can be spotted rhapsodizing Morrison and her talent in the trailer below.
7272	The film also stars Vidya Balan, Taapsee Pannu, Nithya Menen, Kirti Kulhari, Sharman Joshi, HG Dattatreya, Vikram Gokhale and Sonakshi Sinha.
7273	The film follows Sonic (voiced by ) as he tries to save the world alongside his human pal Tom () and stop the villainous Dr. Robotnik (
7274	The film is set to be released on August 6, 2021.
7275	The film tells the story of Nika (Ina Marija Bartaité), a woman in her early twenties who leaves Ukraine to follow her boyfriend Vlad, (Aleksandr Kuznetsov), a young soldier based in a military camp in Corsica.
7276	The final report of the Pike Committee would not let this one pass. “Even in the context of covert action, ours was a cynical enterprise.”
7277	The findings, published in the Journal of Environmental Psychology, showed that surprisingly, children showed a strong preference for urban environments, whereas the adults preferred the photos of natural environments.
7278	The Finest of Everything!
7279	The Fire Department will continue education by having personnel attending schools, businesses and community organizations during the month of October in support of Fire Prevention Week.
7280	The fire forced families to only take the essentials with them.
7281	The fire has been ruled accidental.
7282	The firm currently makes 20% of its revenues from US courseware, but has been struggling as students increasingly opt to rent second-hand print textbooks to save money.
7283	The firm had revenue of $119.14 million for the quarter.
7284	The firm had revenue of $384.50 million during the quarter, compared to analyst estimates of $384.84 million.
7285	The firm had revenue of $4.01 billion during the quarter, compared to analysts’ expectations of $3.99 billion.
7286	The firm had revenue of $448.50 million during the quarter, compared to the consensus estimate of $463.91 million.
7287	The firm has a market cap of $3.69 billion, a PE ratio of -13.82 and a beta of 1.63.
7288	The firm owned 43,235 shares of the semiconductor company’s stock after selling 4,149 shares during the quarter.
7289	The first answers that popped in my head actually kinda surprised me.
7290	“The first defendant failed in his obligations under the law.
7291	The first Dr. John album, 1968’s did well, though the elaborate stage show was far more popular.
7292	The first fundraiser is scheduled for Sunday, Sept. 15 at 3 p.m. “Music with a Mission” will be a freewill offering event with a variety of instrumental and vocal music performed by local talents.
7293	The first legs will be played over February 18-19 and February 25-26 with the return fixtures scheduled for March 10, 11, 17 and 18.
7294	The first officer asked the captain if he wanted to turn back.
7295	• The first official train left Valletta Station for Notabile Railway Station, situated under Saqqajja Hill in Rabat, on Wednesday, February 28, 1883, at 3pm.
7296	The first point is directly in front of the posts, the second on the 15-meter line parallel with the left touchline and the third on the 15-meter line on the right side of the field.
7297	The first post-mortem disrupts the body through major incisions, removal or cross-sectioning of organs, and the removal through biopsy of parts of the skin to determine the age of bruises or cuts.
7298	The first round of auditions consisted of 16 performances from Rider students, although only seven could move on to the finals.
7299	The Flames have agreed to be the primary tenant, former city solicitor Glenda Cole said Thursday.
7300	The flight crew of the Enola Gay before setting off to drop the Atomic Bomb.
7301	The flyover was originally supposed to open to traffic Wednesday tonight, but VDOT said a pre-opening inspection found “items” that need to be completed.
7302	The focus will be to bring technology-led industries supported home-grown talent into Gibraltar.
7303	The folks who run the “NBA on TNT” social media accounts found that out the hard way Friday.
7304	The following are the 12 best business-class antivirus tools for Android, according to AV-TEST’s July 2019 evaluations of 20 Android security apps.
7305	The following statement from Dan Guerrero has been sent out to the greater UCLA community from the UCLA Athletic Department.
7306	The food truck is a white and light green trailer.
7307	The forces of centrifugalizm have taken over, while the forces of centripetalizm and lovely living have been cast out.
7308	The forecasted bad weather follows last week’s unseasonably windy spell, which saw gusts of up to 60mph in the south east.
7309	The former FBI director has been a vehement critic of the president since his ouster in May 2017.
7310	The formerly country singer seemed to turn the sweet, wide-eyed girl next door image to some kind of rebel without a cause, fighting the haters and singing about shaking it off — before singing five more songs about it.
7311	The former prosecutor has been criticized by some criminal justice advocates as being too tough on the accused during her tenures as the San Francisco district attorney and California attorney general.
7312	The former West Ham and Spurs manager won over the nation on I'm a Celebrity with his one liners and devotion to his wife, Sandra.
7313	The four of them sit on the edge of the great ditch wondering what to do.
7314	The four-time major champion is the 8-1 favorite to win the year’s final major at Royal Portrush, where he has the course record, in his native Northern Ireland.
7315	The franchise owner of Waves Detail Pro on the NSW mid-north coast, Michael Rowsthorne, said that whenever possible do not park under trees or light posts.
7316	The free concert is 8 p.m. Saturday, following Cruise Nights.
7317	The free licence was first paid for by a Labour government in 2000.
7318	The French government reacted quickly and by mid-June had officially prohibited the sale of CBD.
7319	The freshest menswear, sneakers, sunglasses, and more worth your disposable income, handpicked by GQ editors.
7320	“The full faith and credit of the United States of America should never, ever be in question,” Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California said in a floor speech before the vote.
7321	The funding will go towards the new Children’s Discovery Center in the Rock Springs Library.
7322	The fund owned 25,013 shares of the company’s stock after selling 571 shares during the quarter.
7323	The fund owned 50,451 shares of the company’s stock after purchasing an additional 8,980 shares during the quarter.
7324	The fund owned 7,236 shares of the semiconductor company’s stock after buying an additional 6,058 shares during the quarter.
7325	The fund owned 74,261 shares of the network equipment provider’s stock after selling 78,647 shares during the period.
7326	“The funds are meant to tip the balance,” says Lawrence, “towards a different kind of corporate culture.”
7327	The further evidence you’re going to be able to compile, the much more complex the possibility of one’s assert success.
7328	The future, according to her, being no more than 15 to 20 years away, is a no-cash society.
7329	The game featured one red card and five yellow cards between the two teams with Benedictine picking up four yellow cards.
7330	The games will also stream live on FOX Sports GO.
7331	The Game Warden caught him.
7332	The game will launch with several Call of Duty multiplayer modes and Battle Royale.
7333	The Garden Bunkie in Lutwyche won for its sustainable building design.
7334	The General Assembly picked the new Security Council members in a secret ballot on Friday.
7335	The General Meeting took place as the Global Esports Foundation (GEF), backed by Chinese technology company Tencent, was established in Singapore.
7336	“The general play from the two at the top of the pitch was really good against Southampton.
7337	The general public thinks, Oh, it’s just a handful of guys, because of the NFL PR machine.
7338	The general was allegedly killed inside a giant piranha tank built inside Kim's Ryongsong Residence, in North Korea's capital Pyongyang.
7339	The generations before us got to have such a beautiful world and we have to fix it," said 13-year-old Galicia Lozano.
7340	The Giants had two opposing forward line stars in Greene and Jeremy Cameron, and it was with some relief to this observer that it was those two players who conspired in the most illustrative play of the Giants’ day.
7341	The girlfriend’s account sounds typical of a person in an abusive relationship who will defend their partner regardless of what’s being done to them, and who is currently in denial.
7342	The girl has told the police she was given food approximately once a day and allowed to bathe every two days.
7343	The girl’s body was found Wednesday by volunteer searchers who were on a bridge over Cherry Creek.
7344	The Glen hadn’t had a repeat winner in nearly a decade, since Marcos Ambrose in 2011-12.
7345	The global space economy today is worth $350 billion but is predicted to be worth $2.7 trillion by 2040.
7346	The goal came after Tom Wilson took a run at Barrie, drawing a response from Leafs fourth-liner Frederik Gauthier.
7347	The Golden Arches’ presenting sponsorship of the 2019 ECAASU Conference is part of the company’s mission to help young people reach their academic aspirations and dreams by providing access to educational resources.
7348	“The Good Fight: America’s Ongoing Struggle for Justice” by Rick Smolan and Jennifer Erwitt is a book that endeavors to bring many of this country’s major struggles together in a way that would allow the reader to get a basic understanding of each.
7349	The Goods & Services Tax (GST) Council, at its meeting on Friday, is likely to revise rates on outdoor catering services and matchsticks and raise the threshold for levying 28 per cent on hotel room tariff.
7350	The Gophers offense took the field with under six minutes left and needed 59 yards for a TD.
7351	The goverment on Saturday released the maps of newly created Union Territories (UTs) of Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh and the map of India depicting these UTs.
7352	The government decided to use public funds so those not covered by Atol would also be helped - because of the scale of disruption and logistical problems that would be created if it did not step in.
7353	The government has the final word on this matter, but the punishment, in this case, does not fit the crime, and should be lessened so that it does.
7354	The government of Singapore and Andhra Pradesh has terminated the Amaravati Capital City Startup Area project on Tuesday, November 12, after the state demanded the closure through a government order dated November 11, 2019.
7355	The government’s ban on online gambling has far-reaching implications.
7356	The government should continue on this thread and incorporate an all inclusive government where every Kogite irrespective of tribe, status or gender has a stake in the our system of governance.
7357	The government’s present policy is a moratorium on nuclear power, and Taylor reiterated that.
7358	The governor noted that the prayers are very symbolic to his team because it was held in the month of Ramadan and the last 10 days and Friday of the Ramadan, saying his team would not cease praying.
7359	The Governor of Kaduna State, Nasir El-Rufai has called for the arrest and prosecution of drivers, who while protesting the killing of their colleague by a policeman for refusing to pay bribe, blocked the expressway.
7360	“The governor said he has consulted all stakeholders, but the small-scale miners were not consulted.
7361	The Governor’s Study Group on Criminal Justice Policy on Tuesday toured Holman Correctional Facility in Atmore.
7362	The grainy picture, which is obtained through surveillance footage, shows a man who is believed to be the suspect who fired shots at the Chicago rapper on the street.
7363	The Grasshoppers are solid all over the pitch.
7364	The Grattan Insitute's Brendan Coates, whose research expanded on findings from the Henry Tax Review, said 10 per cent was "less bad" than going to 12 per cent as super increases took away from pay rises.
7365	The GRDB said it is urging all players within the industry to remain vigilant as the matter is being investigated.
7366	The greater Dallas area has about 2,700-plus Rotarians across 63 clubs.
7367	“The great thing about the opportunity on Friday night is that it is something different and unique.
7368	The Green Party, which has one seat in the House of Commons, has nominated 70 candidates.
7369	The Greens co-leaders Robert Habeck and Annalena Baerbock campaigning in Dresden, Saxony, this week.
7370	The grist mill will run throughout the day and cornmeal will be for sale.
7371	The groom spent some pre-wedding time in NJ, as he shared a beach captioned "Down The Shore (Ventnor)" on Aug. 31.
7372	The group, however, dismisses the claim.
7373	The Group Managing Director of NNPC, Mele Kyari signed for the Nigerian side, while Vagit Alekperov, President, signed on behalf of Lukoil.
7374	The group of investors explain that “subpoena’s are necessary” because Banks, Grimes, and the three news outlets potentially “have information bearing on the veracity of Musk’s tweet.”
7375	The group’s comment follows the recent case of kidnapping involving two Canadian women in the Ashanti Regional capital of Kumasi.
7376	The group's earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA) was €4.3 million.
7377	The Guardian contacted all the named car companies and their responses are set out here.
7378	The Guards said he was trapped by its intelligence organization.
7379	The guns, once used for shooting and target practice are now apparently a hobby to shoot anything that has a pulse.
7380	The guy is wealthy, very resourceful, and he knows how to play the system.
7381	“The guys swung the bat awesome.
7382	The gymnastics group are pictured outside the centre with chair of the club, Clare Huxley.
7383	The hardcore loyalists on both sides, that’s also the practice on their personal Facebook pages.
7384	The Hastings and Rye MP quit in protest at Boris Johnson's handling of Brexit.
7385	The hawk clawed Lulu's neck and Cecilia said the bird only got one of its claws in her pup.
7386	The Hays and Buhler defenses took over the Thursday night show in Buhler during the first half.
7387	The 'HBK' of the early '90s would be dated and cringy in today's product but thanks to Michaels' ingenuity and understanding of his character, he never felt stale or unwatchable.
7388	The health and life coach was just as ecstatic to break the news to her 119,000 Instagram followers on Monday.
7389	The Health Services Board has not been forthcoming,” Muzoremba said.
7390	The hearings may feature debate over what constitutes a crime for purposes of impeachment.
7391	The hearing – which can either be a written exchange or in-person hearings – is a lengthy, months-long process.
7392	The high-density suburb in the Harare Metropolitan Province.
7393	“The higher awards arise from a combination of factors, including the relatively high award levels for personal injury claims.”
7394	The highest measured total from the National Weather Service indicated that Northfield topped the Minnesota list with 4.45" of rain.
7395	The highly anticipated new restaurant and beer parlour from the folks behind Brassneck and the Alibi Room is finally here.
7396	The high-speed winds are also not expected to die down until at least Tuesday, meaning the bushfires may continue to burn through the weekend.
7397	The history shouldn’t be let to repeat itself and the leaders shouldn’t be a cause of making the country become divided again.
7398	The Hokies finished third in the tournament with a consolation game win over Southwestern Louisiana.
7399	The hole over Antarctica is healing, but a new study finds the planet's ozone layer is thinning at lower latitudes.
7400	The holidays have a hum that I just love: kids running around, grown-ups jockeying for space in the packed kitchen, and everyone else raising glasses (and laughing) in the living room.
7401	The Home Office suspended the licences of some test centres and revoked the visas of those accused of cheating.
7402	The home’s smoke alarms were working, according to Barnes.
7403	The Hornets are expected to be mostly healthy.
7404	"The horse looked a picture and raced accordingly."
7405	The hospital was also acquired by some other hospital chain which changed three or four Linac.
7406	The hottest temperature of the year so far - which is unlikely to be beaten this weekend - has been 78.4F (25.8C), recorded at Treknow in Cornwall on April 19 and again on May 15 at Kinlochewe in the Scottish Highlands.
7407	The House Financial Services Committee is responsible for conducting oversight of U.S. participation in the multilateral development banks, including the World Bank.
7408	The house is surrounded by a large lawn and has several decks (one reached directly from the master bedroom) and two stone-walled terraces.
7409	• The House Judiciary Committee reportedly asked more than 80 companies to explain how they had been harmed by Amazon, Apple, Facebook and Google.
7410	The humidity is obviously a massive factor at this time of the year and so the pace of the game was noticeably slow.
7411	The hunger for peace in Afghanistan is real and deep.
7412	The husband admitted to killing a doe and said that his wife killed an illegal buck a few weeks prior.
7413	The Icons and Cruisetopia teams were Tasked to present a talent show, with every member of each family fully participating.
7414	“The idea was a very welcome one,” said Bernadette Jones, principal of Bullsbrook College.
7415	“The identities of the deceased persons will not be released to authorities until they have all been positively identified by scientific methods and next of kin have been notified,” issues manager Cheryl Mahyr said in a statement Friday.
7416	The identity of the donor is kept anonymous.
7417	The Illinois Farm Bureau has a vocal critic of the Trump administration's attempts to renegotiate trade relations and said it is concerned about the long-term damage that Trump is having on established relations with trade partners.
7418	The immense HP stat also makes their self-healing powers even more incredible.
7419	The Impartial Reporter is on the main street.
7420	The impeachment inquiry, which offers up both real-time drama and a frighteningly close look into the bizarre mind of Devin Nunes, overwhelmed this debate.
7421	"The implant which delivers the medication is not currently approved by the FDA, but has been used in other countries and here in the U.S. to deliver Naltrexone," Pastorick said.
7422	The incident happened around 1:30 a.m. outside of the 7-Eleven located at 127 Avenue and 97 Street in the Killarney neighbourhood.
7423	The incident occurred on Nov. 4 at Alive Montessori and Private School on Wembley Road, in the Bathurst Street and Eglinton Avenue area, Toronto police said.
7424	The incident - which happened four years ago - was never recorded.
7425	“The income is more than I’d ever imagined,” Mr. Gagne, 54, said.
7426	The Indian DetectiveThe Indian Detective: canceled or renewed?
7427	The Indians did not respond back right away.
7428	The Indians forced a punt and an interception to keep the score at 14-3.
7429	The indictment alleges that Ald.
7430	The injectables, she stressed, was not good for women who had history of migraine as it led to some slight headaches in the first four months of usage.
7431	The injection zone is thousands of feet below the surface and there are no existing drinking water wells in the area.
7432	The institute added that the 69 had normalized migratory status in Mexico.
7433	The Institute has served as a regional center for teaching and research training at the post-graduate level of population scientists in English-speaking countries in Africa.
7434	The Institute of International Finance has projected that Zambia’s debt could rise up to as much as 90% of the Gross Domestic Product(GDP).
7435	The institutional investor owned 406,507 shares of the financial services provider’s stock after selling 4,800 shares during the period.
7436	The institutional investor owned 53,300 shares of the company’s stock after acquiring an additional 9,900 shares during the quarter.
7437	The institutional investor owned 61,361 shares of the company’s stock after acquiring an additional 22,108 shares during the period.
7438	The intent is not to exploit but to show how women manage to live and work in a predatory man’s world.”
7439	The interesting history of Fyshwick’s past weaves between the passionate business owners of today.
7440	The interest in Mo Eisa last summer before he finally made the move to Championship side Bristol City from Cheltenham is one such example.
7441	The interim pastor describes her new co-worker as a warm, open and authentic person.
7442	The internal politics of the Coyote Valley Band of Pomos, who ran a casino on their rancheria some miles north of Ukiah, interested him.
7443	The international community, for example, set the target of protecting 17 per cent of our planet’s landmass by 2020, a commitment Canada signed onto and is working toward, though slowly.
7444	Their best shot at a better life?
7445	The Ireland reverse led Townsend to make wholesale changes, including fielding an entirely new back row against Samoa.
7446	Their engagement was messy even before Brown found out the truth about Stevens, but his lies were the final nail in the coffin.
7447	"Their families are so proud of them, and although devastated, we are comforted by having shared so many wonderful times of love and joy together.
7448	The Irish music manager, 67, has made a comeback on the show as a judge alongside former Pussycat Doll star Nicole Scherzinger.
7449	Their main aim is to bring simplicity to life by innovating simple yet latest techniques to counter any technological drawback whether it is to do with any iOS, Android, Windows or other devices.
7450	The Iron Mountain Mountaineers defeated the Negaunee Miners 17-14 on Sunny 101.9FM.
7451	Their plan to own the bio revolution the way the U.S. owned the silicon revolution, the IT revolution 20 years ago, they are deliberately moving and strategically moving to operationalize that thought leadership in that space.
7452	Their potential was unlimited, but craziness, alcohol and drugs, and an inability to control themselves and stay on track did them in.”
7453	Their rapid proliferation over the past few years should have caught the attention of auto dealerships, and chains like Mr. Lube, Midas, Jiffy Lube and Great Canadian Oil Change.
7454	Their search found nothing unusual, according to David Rishel, Shenango Township Fire Chief.
7455	Their sentiments come even as the government warned detractors of the ongoing exercise of dire consequences with several arrests having been made across the country of those who have barred enumerators from carrying out their duties.
7456	Their solution – microalgae.
7457	Their unique friendship spawned an irreverent tribute to the Yiddish language, culture and comedic tradition they were reared on.
7458	The Islamic Republic has previously threatened to block oil shipments through the Strait of Hormuz if the sanctions halt its energy exports.
7459	The Islamic Republic of Iran announced Monday that the British-flagged oil tanked Stena Impero, seized on July 19 by its Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corp’s naval commandos in the Strait of Hormuz, is free to leave.
7460	The Islamic State group has expanded into eastern Kunar Province, where the US was forced to withdraw after several punishing attacks from the Taliban.
7461	The issue of crop burning had came up before the apex court which is hearing a matter related to pollution in Delhi-NCR.
7462	The issue of making the Town of St George paedestrian-friendly and enacting regulations to allow for the provision of parking spaces whenever a new building is being constructed was another concerned expressed by Byam.
7463	The issue was raised two weeks ago at a School Committee meeting during discussions about the repairs being attempted at the school.
7464	The Italian news agency ANSA says a male tourist got into trouble when his inflatable swan was carried away by the wind.
7465	The IT department expects project teams to include data structures and data quality in the design to ensure that the planned application contributes to enterprise data integrity.
7466	The JD program is the first level of law study at UBC.
7467	The Jets made it 2-0 when Chris Martin slid one home from Sam Wilson at 10:15 and 3-0 at 16:08 as Payton Melvin swatted one home from Tokessy and Martin.
7468	“The JMU was supposed to be scrutinizing and intercepting vessels entering our territorial marine waters with FLIR and other toys, and occasionally running S&R for lost “fishermen”.”
7469	The jobless statistics are false.
7470	The Jo Goldenberg Restaurant in the Jewish quarter of Paris, which was attacked by Palestinian terrorists in 1982.
7471	The Joker clashing with Gotham's more traditional gangsters was a theme briefly explored in could explore the idea more fully, and with even more brutality than slamming someone's head into a pencil.
7472	The Jonas Brothers on ‘The Late Late Show’
7473	The journalists and their media outlets did not respond to requests for comment.
7474	“The Journey and Promise of African American Preaching,” I discuss the historical formation of the black preacher.
7475	The judge said Wilson had issued instructions to his co-accused, Kelly and Luke Wilson in regards to the destruction of the cars as well as the method by which Hanley was to be murdered.
7476	The judges review images of the artists’ work and their set up that they intend to exhibit at the show.
7477	“The judiciary needs to stop Buhari if the country must move forward.
7478	The junior fencer helped a company in Paris win a startup award in Summer 2018, received academic honors and is 10 wins away from becoming Temple University’s winningest sabre.
7479	The juror told Vice’s Keegan Hamilton: “You know how we were told we can’t look at the media during the trial?
7480	The Kaduna State Police Command said it has arrested 50 suspects involved in kidnapping, robbery and other criminal activities across the state and recovered 27 guns, 20 of which were AK 47 rifles.
7481	The Kaepernick camp Friday night began preparing an alternate plan.
7482	The Kayenta Trail and Upper Emerald Pools Trail remain closed due to a landslide that has continued to settle since July 2018.
7483	The keeper made four stops and is still yet to concede a goal in A-10 action.
7484	The key to a Conservative victory in Election 2019 lies in meticulous research and a tight script.
7485	The key worker apartments are affordable units earmarked for lower-income public sector workers such as police, nurses, teachers and paramedics.
7486	The Kim family is stricken by poverty and the increasing lack of sustainable work.
7487	The kingdom also has yet to take steps that would put flesh at home on the skeleton of its notion of religious tolerance.
7488	The Knife’s remix was created together with her brother and has a bit more of an edgy element to it.
7489	“The knowledge they will gain over the course of these 3 weeks will help create the foundations for higher learning, and the development of innovative, viable solutions for the future of Bermuda.
7490	The Kogi Government has debunked the allegation of an attack by herdsmen at Big Joe motor park in Lokoja on Tuesday.
7491	The Kominsky Method has been created by Chuck Lorre, the man behind several popular sitcoms such as Roseanne, Two and a Half Men and The Big Bang Theory, among others.
7492	The Kremlin declined to name the rocket system shown on video blasting off from Sary-Shagan, an anti-ballistic training range in Kazakhstan.
7493	The L2/R2 buttons have been outright replaced in favor of adaptive triggers.
7494	The Labor powerbroker said she first learned about the property from her husband in a text message.
7495	The Labour MP for Hampstead & Kilburn was wheeled into the chamber ahead of the first vote on Tuesday night, on an amendment brought by Tory MP John Baron.
7496	The ladies next to me in the mud laughed again.
7497	The Lahore High Court (LHC) on Saturday permitted to remove former prime minister Nawaz Sharif’s name from the Exit Control List without any conditions for a time period of four weeks.
7498	The language of the fight is debasing as hordes of musicians and commentators thrown insults, invectives and curses at the other, distributing their crass language very widely on WhatsApp.
7499	The large solar field is estimated to save the city $140,000 per year.
7500	The last 30 minutes of Johnson’s time at Fresno State was left for audience members to ask any questions regarding her life in general, her process of creative writing and inquiries about specific excerpts and life events from her published books.
7501	"The last few episodes have been difficult and your love and positivity is so much beautiful."
7502	The last time bus drivers were involved in a strike in Metro Vancouver was in 2001.
7503	The last time South Africa played a Test series in India‚ in 2015‚ Ashwin and Jadeja bowled 63.32% of all India’s overs and claimed 54 of the 69 wickets that fell to the home side’s bowlers.
7504	The last time the Knicks played the Nets, Frank Ntilikina couldn’t even get off the bench.
7505	The last time the pair played each other was in the second round of the 2015 US Open, when Konta stunned the Spaniard in a 3hr 23min epic — the longest women’s match in the tournament since they introduced the tie-break in 1970.
7506	The last video store in Kelowna, B.C., is officially closing its doors — and its extensive collection is now up for sale.
7507	The last week was especially rough, she said.
7508	The latest deadly blaze to hit Bangladesh’s congested capital Dhaka tore through the 22-storey FR Tower on Thursday, leaving some of the hundreds trapped inside screaming for help as horrified onlookers massed outside.
7509	The launch of a real-time feed of the channel coincides with a turbulent period in Washington as US president Donald Trump faces an impeachment enquiry and as the country gears up for the 2020 election campaign.
7510	The LCC and ecumenical partners encourage all Liberians to remain resolute, prayerful, and positively engage in pursuing the welfare of Liberia.
7511	The leader of the Microsoft Nigeria, Mr Bayo Awnayo said the organization will assist the state government to ensure productivity and efficiency of the workforce of the state.
7512	The leap from a working-class high school in Texas to Harvard was formidable, says Exley, and the juxtaposition of the elite with the humble was likely an early shaper of his political views.
7513	The leave to appeal application will be heard on November 22, and the criminal case was postponed to February 4, 2020.
7514	The legacy of Sweet Auburn remains an epic story of Atlanta’s Black heritage.
7515	The legal team for Ezekiel Elliott believes the Dallas Cowboys running back is being extorted after an incident in Las Vegas in May where he could be seen pushing against a security guard who then fell.
7516	The legend of Daniel Jones has already begun in New York, and the rookie has already done something Eli Manning did not.
7517	The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Princess had some of the best items in the series, but few were as fun to use as the Spinner.
7518	The library is designed with 30 study rooms, a Digital Scholars Studio, a 24/7 study area, a built-in cafe and the Student Success Center, which was previously located in the Tuttleman Learning Center.
7519	The licence plates on this car were also stolen.
7520	The lift doors open to the loading dock.
7521	The likes of Sheffield’s Magtec are offering a range of solutions to the emissions problem posed by the transport industry, with plans underway for electrically powered buses and refuse lorries.
7522	The likes of the Jockey Club and the major sales companies help fund the organization, and their heads either sit on the board of directors or had until recently.
7523	The Lima demonstration started at San Martin Square during the afternoon and ended outside the Attorney General's Office in the evening.
7524	The Lions led the game 2-1 heading into the third period, but the Jets battled back to take the game 3-2.
7525	The Lions star said he couldn’t recall feeling any contact to his eyes.
7526	The liquidation of fascism must be the liquidation of the bourgeoisie that created it.
7527	The list features Petr Cech in between the sticks with Chelsea legend and leader, John Terry as well Gary Cahill, Branislav Ivanovic and Ashley Cole making the back-four.
7528	The list of players his size or smaller who have logged that many blocks in a season is (and it’s mostly Dwyane Wade, probably the best shot-blocking guard ever).
7529	The litigants said that they were not allowed inside the Saket Court premises.
7530	The loan program was called the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility.
7531	The local teams serve as the eyes and ears of the district and national emergency systems that cover surveillance, infection prevention and control, patient care, cross-border activities and coordination with communities.
7532	The longer trading day in Europe compared to the US also naturally forces more trading to the close because of thin liquidity in the morning and early afternoon trading sessions.
7533	The Los Angeles native was also in the films Amityville: The Evil Escapes, The Horror Show, Playroom and Beverly Hills Brats.
7534	The losers will be those who want to use government to somehow prop up politically favored news sources.
7535	The loss to the Exchequer for not including these households is about €25 million.
7536	The low from November at $6526 was taken out in the process.
7537	The low temperatures for the month set a state record.
7538	The lyrics are only half the problem.
7539	"The main issue is the absence of clear support mechanisms and methods for such initiatives," she said.
7540	The Mains exam will be another online MCQ type paper of 200 marks.
7541	The majority of new apartments in the pipeline are expected to rent for more than $1,875 a month, the study says.
7542	The makers expect a crowd over 3 lakh this time.
7543	The male's arm was injured when the car rolled at Moranbah on Sunday night.
7544	The Maltese government has spoken of pressure on Malta’s migrant reception facilities.
7545	The man allegedly told Mr. Singh said that the latter’s nieces aged 11, 15 and 17 were at the station and had complained that their uncle ill-treats them.
7546	The Manchester public had good reason to be suspicious of Trautmann.
7547	The man in the ditch growls back: “it’s Bojo!”
7548	The man known as Mr Christmas has died.
7549	The Manufacturers Life Insurance Company boosted its holdings in Diageo by 1.9% during the 3rd quarter.
7550	The man was pronounced dead about an hour later in hospital at 4:19 a.m., police said.
7551	The man was taken to an area hospital where he is listed in critical condition.
7552	The marketing and distribution of his songs and projects are being handled by ZimCelebs Media Group and Stewart Nyamayaro.
7553	The market size of the air purifier industry is estimated to reach Rs 896 crore by 2023, said Amway in a statement.
7554	The marks the first time all eight issues have been printed in the same book.
7555	The masked armed national security operatives, she said had already left the scene before she got there while evidence available had also been disturbed.
7556	The match is part of the 2019-20 Arab Club Champions Cup, officially named the Mohammed VI Champions Cup in honor of Morocco’s Sovereign.
7557	The match is scheduled for 7 p.m. and will air live on ACCNX.
7558	The match, scheduled for 7 p.m. Saturday, November 23, is expected to draw a large turnout of fans.
7559	The match was announced as a draw.
7560	The match was played at Cheyenne East High School.
7561	The match will kick-off at 7:00pm at the Bangabandhu National Stadium and BTV and Bangla TV will telecast the match live.
7562	The mayor was also able to balance the budget without any significant property tax increase, except for $18 million to keep libraries open on Sundays at a cost of about $46 a year to property owners.
7563	“The medallists will form a pool of national team players who will be used for regional and international assignments if they qualify,” she said.
7564	“The media is beginning to include different shapes and images in advertising but many in the industry still struggle due to the fact that the world still embraces those that are thin above the stereotypical healthy person,” Leigh-Smith said.
7565	The median rent for an apartment in the capital city is $830 for a one-bedroom unit and $1,030 for a two-bedroom, according to Apartment List.
7566	The medical research company reported $2.62 earnings per share (EPS) for the quarter, beating the consensus estimate of $2.53 by $0.09.
7567	“The meeting between the two leaders, Battulga Khaltmaa and Donald J. Trump has been in the spirit of the times.
7568	The meeting directed Chauhan to file a FIR in Delhi with regards to forgery case in the BCA.
7569	The meeting, held under the auspices of the Kumasi Metropolitan Assembly (KMA), was aimed at briefing traders on the payment modalities of the stores and progress of the allocation exercise.
7570	The meetings, the source said, are being led by Dwayne Benefield, VP and general manager of PlayStation Vue.
7571	The men of Alpha have a good laugh at the stick-up guy’s expense, despite the fact that he’s promising not to hurt anyone and pay back the money he wants to steal.
7572	The men’s team faced tough competition in the lanes, earning just two first place finishes in its 11 swim events, with the team falling to Merced 126-72.
7573	The Metropolitan Ballroom and Clubroom, an exclusive venue of D’Amico Catering, celebrated its grand opening this past Tuesday with a champagne flute cheers and a swift, sweet samba.
7574	The Miami Dolphins may be bringing us the worst case of tanking this season that the NFL has ever seen, and it is no surprise there are people around the league who are unhappy about it.
7575	The middle ground here would be a situation where rates stay in a tight range for the foreseeable future.
7576	The migraine had been debilitating.
7577	"The military and the people and the political forces need to act with bravery and responsibility in taking quick steps to a democratic, reconciliatory transitional period in the country," he said in a statement.
7578	The mince pie is going Mexican at Thomasina Miers’ popular group of fiesta-throwing restaurants.
7579	The Mine Loading Building was built in 1907, completing the final assembly of underwater mines used to protect the entrance to Pensacola Bay by the Mine Planter Service.
7580	The mini-holes are designed to face in different directions and be different sizes to instantly soften and disperse the cool airflow except for manual adjustment and water condensation.
7581	The Minister also maintained his party’s position that the Value Added Tax (VAT) has been increased indirectly.
7582	The ministerial meetings are conducted in order to enhance efforts to reach a deal before increased tariffs are slapped on Chinese imports by the US.
7583	The Ministry of Education, please go through all the school people who are paid are still in goverment house free water, free electricity free accommodation this is not good.
7584	The Ministry of Health confirms a total of measles cases have been reported to the Disease Surveillance Team, since the outbreak started.
7585	The Missouri Geological Survey says mild earthquakes in that part of the state aren’t unusual, noting the area lies in the New Madrid Seismic Zone.
7586	The mistreatment reportedly got worse in 2018, when Dawson’s mother, Isabel, threatened to kill Finley’s cat after he decided not to discuss the dispute.
7587	The mobile operator had to apologise after a system upgrade error added bogus roaming fees to customers' bills and suspended their services.
7588	The Modi government for its second term was sworn in on May 30. Mr Nadda also referred to major labour reforms undertaken by the government.
7589	The moment one of the boys punches a shopper.
7590	The Mona Lisasmile is a smile that gives credence to the historic renaissance painting of Leonardo Da Vinci believed to have been painted 1503-1519 and probably was not finished due to the death ofthe creator Leonardo Da Vinci.
7591	The months following his arrest have seen escalating tensions on the streets of Khartoum.
7592	The more present you can be in the bedroom, the better your experience will be.
7593	‘The more we looked, the more we found’
7594	The most crucial time, where your confidence, plan and execution will pay you.
7595	The mother claimed that the teacher, Hnin Nu, had given inconsistent and possibly misleading accounts of what had happened.
7596	The motion passes with one opposition vote.
7597	The mourning for Notre Dame is heartening in a world divided by resurgent nationalisms and “strong” leaders trying to maximise the gains of provincial and petty bigotries.
7598	The MOU sets out the basic terms of co-development of the Maricunga salar, with details of the agreement currently under negotiation.
7599	The move comes after CA last week revealed an upgraded paid parental leave policy for women and men.
7600	The move marks a fresh victory for the Daily Mail’s End The Mobile Madness campaign, which has led calls for tougher penalties.
7601	“The MP did not slap me but only chided by just touching my cheek just like an elder brother.
7602	The MPLCs are chaired by the Chief Executive Officer of the councils and comprise electoral stakeholders including; the District Commissioner, traditional leaders, representatives of political parties and MEC representatives.
7603	The much-loved preschooler was popular with other children and was a "charmer".
7604	The Mueller Report Was My Tipping Point: I was a Trump transition staffer, and I’ve seen enough.
7605	The munitions bill was passed unanimously, while Republican Congressman Thomas Massie of Kentucky was the sole House member to oppose the human rights bill.
7606	The murders came the day after other Manson followers, excluding Van Houten, killed pregnant actress Sharon Tate and four others.
7607	The museum docent told us the story of New London’s role in the historic La Amistad slave revolt.
7608	The museum includes exhibits about Aaron’s baseball career, tracing it from childhood to his years in the Major League Baseball, and information about his family.
7609	The Muslim girl-child suffers daily from the illegal, unlawful, unconstitutional and blatant impunity of Christian school officials.
7610	The Muslim Vote Weekend is an initiative to send Muslim Canadians to advance polls over the Thanksgiving weekend.
7611	“The NAF, operating in concert with surface forces, will sustain its operations against the terrorists in the North-east.”
7612	“The NASA and Boeing team is learning while building this first core stage.
7613	The National Commission for Civic Education (NCCE) has urged citizens to lobby their Members of Parliament (MPs) to help speed up parliament’s proceedings on the amendment of the article 243 (1) of the 1992 constitution.
7614	The National Film and Video Censors Board (NFVCB) has frowned at the video of Nigerian ace singer Tekno’s single hit ‘Agege’, describing it as ‘Outrageous and unacceptable’.
7615	The National Institutes of Health () funds a program called IDeA Networks for Biomedical Research Excellence (), whose goal is to provide support to states with underrepresented research infrastructure, allowing them to compete for major grants.
7616	The national police chief, Tito Karnavian, said the Election Commission and courts were the appropriate institutions for resolving complaints about the election.
7617	The Nationals are 30-23 against division opponents.
7618	The Navy has been buying new Virginias at a rate of two per year, hoping to mitigate an attack-sub shortfall during the mid-2020s.
7619	Then Boon clarifies, “You’re gonna hump her brains out, aren’t you?” and Otter explains to him, “Boon, I anticipate a deeply religious experience.”
7620	“The needs in terms of public transportation are huge,” Plante said.
7621	The neighborhood was split into two parts by the ancient walls of Athens, the so-called Themistoclean Walls.
7622	The neighbourhood brewery held its second anniversary party on November 20th and it included the release of their new Sustenance Barrel Aged Imperial Stout and an by Amelie’s Cakehaus.
7623	The network said it would beef up training for its staff in handling such issues and hire someone so contestants can make complaints about behavior confidentially apart from show producers.
7624	The new arena includes a mezzanine with a concession area, and a meeting room with a balcony that can be used by teams or rented for games.
7625	The New England Patriots Win Super Bowl 2019; Tom Brady And Gisele Celebrate!
7626	The newest member of the New England Patriots!
7627	The new items in the ToR include faceless and anonymised scrutiny assessments, reduction of litigation and expeditious disposal of appeals at CIT(A) stage and going up to the Supreme Court.
7628	The New Jersey native has spent her 33-year career at Deloitte, a global professional services firm.
7629	“The new kids all established a time,” said Coach Lacie Pearson.
7630	The newly Democratic-led State Legislature’s first act in January was to pass sweeping changes intended to make it easier for New Yorkers to vote, and Mr. Cuomo had made voting reform one of his legislative priorities this year.
7631	The new movie is more of what you love, even if not every critic is sold on the idea that's enough.
7632	The new nomination process required students to retrieve the electronic signatures of any student, regardless of class year.
7633	The new protocol for attorneys is still technically operating on a trial basis, but Spradlin said neither party has indicated any issues with the agreement.
7634	The new public art sculpture, The Dancer, was donated by Detroit Design Center co-owners and brothers Erik and Israel Nordin, who were inspired by the Ralph C. Wilson, Jr. Foundation’s $1 million grant to help renovate the conservatory’s glass dome.
7635	The news came after the Bears were able to stun the then-No.
7636	The new season will also mark the introduction of random testing of players’ drivers to ensure they are legal.
7637	The new study found that threespine stickleback in some California estuaries are evolving to have fewer lateral plates as their habitats become more pond-like due to a warmer, drier climate.
7638	The new task UVU force, Coordinated Access to Resources and Education, or CARE, focuses on alleviating housing and food insecurity, in addition to promoting safety and health.
7639	The new video saw the reality TV star twerking up a storm while getting ready to go out, a video that has since garnered several views and likes.
7640	The New York connection comes via the owner of Lorimer, Yuji Haraguchi — originally from Utsunomiya, Tochigi Prefecture — who has been a transplant to the U.S. for the past 10 years.
7641	“The next 72 hours are going to be challenging,” Gov. Gavin Newsom said at a news conference on Saturday afternoon.
7642	The next building heading west, on the opposite of West Commercial Street, was a factory making Cream Separators — now the village Fair Market.
7643	The next logical step obviously is total integration of the State.”
7644	The next semester back on campus, Lapp’s last one as a professor, she discovered more drive to talk and have discussions about faith with students.
7645	The next step is to get Sweet Home Chicago into grocery stores.
7646	The next step towards this goal will see them work with the University's Drug Discovery Unit to develop compounds that could target this enzyme.
7647	The next thing I know, I'm knocked out and seriously, seriously injured.
7648	The NFL conditionally reinstated the Patriots wide receiver on Friday.
7649	Then, for the rest of your professional life, you spend one month learning and 11 months working.
7650	Then, how far do we need to go in space to have 1,000 earth-like planets orbiting around them?
7651	”The Nigeria Centre for Disease Control remains committed to supporting all States’ public health teams to prevent and respond to public health threats,” she assured.
7652	The Nigeria Labour Congress (NLC), Oyo State branch, has said it has given a 24-hour notice before it commences a mass action and paralyse government activities.
7653	The Nigerian government sent an envoy last week to South Africa to formally register their displeasure with the security of African nationals.
7654	The Nigerian leader noted that now that elections were over and he is now back in full force, it was time for “a new way forward that removes completely’’ the threat of terrorism from the Lake Chad sub-region.
7655	The Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation on Thursday opened 2019 Direct Sale of Crude Oil and Direct Purchase to its local and international business partners, and potential off-takers and suppliers with 132 organisations indicating interest.
7656	Then in 2017 she said she thought Bill Clinton should have resigned during the Monica Lewinsky scandal.
7657	Then in the third period, he completed a hat trick giving way to a new set of words, “When it rains, it pours.”
7658	Then Jim, in not a profanity-laden way, said, ‘Get Justin in here right now.’
7659	Then Khosravani will use the broth for a special â€” essentially Old Majorâ€™s take on a tonkotsu ramen.
7660	Then Kim could generously propose a meeting, where promises of ultimate disarmament could be traded for sanctions relief.
7661	Then Linda's clothes filled the shop."
7662	The non-profit organization focuses on ocean research and issues facing marine life, and it's exploring the area with its vessel the Leeway Odyssey.
7663	The NOP’s website and social media channels have also been taken down.
7664	The North American de-icing market is dominated by three large producer- shippers but the market is increasingly being serviced by smaller distributors who are sourcing salt from Africa and other sources.
7665	'Then other males from the neighborhood intervened and began punching and kicking the male who took the vehicle to the point where he was rendered unconscious.'
7666	Then over the Christmas holiday the company stages gay humorist David Sedaris’ The Santaland Diaries, Dec. 6-21.
7667	The NPCC called in the heads of forces after PC Andrew Harper, a 28-year-old newlywed with Thames Valley Police, was killed responding to a reported burglary in Berkshire on August 15.
7668	Then there was England’s defence, an impenetrable wall of white that didn’t given an inch.
7669	The number of educated Bhutanese will even multiply with the governing parties’ commitment to liberalise higher secondary education.
7670	The number of job openings in the U.S. is at a near-record high of.
7671	The number of protesters in Yangon have been small compared to the turnout in some countries.
7672	The number of robbers is unknown.
7673	Then we had a fake ceremony with 130 friends and family at Pop Brixton.
7674	The N.W.T. and Nunavut Chamber of Mines suggests exploration costs are six times higher.
7675	Then you know what happened?
7676	“The observations show a very large increase in the temperature of these heatwaves.
7677	The ODP and the TPLF are currently vying for supremacy within EPRDF, and ADP and SNNP seem to be imploding after failing to consolidate their regional bases.
7678	The offer is going to you,” the 54-year-old actor, who plays War Machine, recalled.
7679	The offer of wraparound childcare for military personnel.
7680	The offers were recently highlighted by travel expert Gilbert Ott, who described them as 'insane'
7681	The Office for the Protection of the Constitution, Germany's domestic security watchdog, warned in April of an estimated 2,240 Islamists with "terrorist potential" living in Germany.
7682	The offices are also witnessing a very thin attendance.
7683	The official message board for Refereum is medium.
7684	The officials who arrested the accused were led by Raju K. Francis, Divisional Forest Officer, Ernakulam.
7685	The Ohio volleyball team took on the Buffalo Bulls Friday night in the Convocation Center.
7686	The older gentleman never said that they were.
7687	The ongoing slowdown, she told reporters, is not specific to India and is a global issue.
7688	The on-loan FC Mainz attacker bagged in two goals in the space of seven first half minutes at Utrecht thrashed FC Den Bosch 5-1.
7689	The only action was to assign a children’s worker to have one-to-one meetings with Amber.
7690	The only game he has missed this year - and it wasn't even a proper game - was the World Cup warm-up match against Australia.
7691	The only other trial to use gene editing inside the body was to treat metabolic diseases.
7692	The only setup you need to do is to add that same Google account in your Duo app on mobile.
7693	The only thing I remember about the margarita, though, is that it was strong.
7694	“The only thing I want from this God, right now, is to lead me to sanity.
7695	The only victim is a man, a son, a husband, a carabiniere, a servant of the state.”
7696	The Ontario government announced last week it was increasing funding levels for these hospitals by 1.5 per cent.
7697	The opening party?
7698	The Opera Mini browser today comes with features like ad-blocker, night-mode and an intelligent news reader, all of which is provided in a small download of less than 10mb.
7699	The operation monitored email inboxes that were linked to the fraudulent accounts and extracted tickets from the emails.
7700	The oral medicine can stunt the cancer's growth and turns advanced forms of the disease into a chronic condition which patients can live with years.
7701	The organization later pulled and updated the poster after public outcry, cutting the depictions of violence.
7702	The organizations receiving grants this year were selected by a committee of employees who volunteer annually to identify worthy organizations that provide projects and services that directly benefit the local community.
7703	The OSA said eliminating competition for the early stages of athlete development is proven globally and incorporates well-established holistic approaches.
7704	The other categories are “Flags of UN Recognized States,” “Native American Sovereign Nations,” and “US Territories.”
7705	The other people killed came from Cass and Van Buren counties.
7706	The other point of speculation is that the head writer of CD Projekt Red left for Blizzard in early 2019, meaning the story is complete at this point although nothing is certain.
7707	The other semifinal will be held at the Fiesta Bowl in Glendale, Arizona.
7708	The other three patients include a Police officer and two security guards.
7709	The other three victims were killed in order to "eliminate witnesses" in the hours after Afowerk's murder, the prosecutors told jurors over the course of the six-week trial.
7710	The other time, I went to the National Assembly to introduce my products to them.
7711	“The other way to do it is to give people too many choices, massive choices, and so you just have cognitive dissonance.”
7712	The ouster was Boeing’s most direct effort to hold someone in senior leadership accountable for the bungled handling of the Max crisis.
7713	The outgoing “K2 platform” Chevrolet Tahoe Z71 wasn’t exactly built to be an off-road beast (“What it’s not is a super hardcore off-road vehicle,” our Andrew Collins said in his ).
7714	The outlook was sunny during the Corporate Jet Investor conference held this past week at the Fontainebleau Miami Beach.
7715	Theo van K bought up large amounts of strawberries, asparagus, raspberries and mushrooms at dozens of big fruit growers before they were harvested.
7716	The overall editing is choppy, too.
7717	The OVER is 4-1 in Boston’s last five home games.
7718	The overwhelming benefits of covert cooperation would consistently outweigh destructive behaviors leading to unnecessary loss of life and property.
7719	The owner is lovely and, as a perk, is often absent.
7720	The owner loses money and the renter loses amenities.
7721	The owner of the Colorado store that stopped selling Nike products after the corporation's controversial Colin Kaepernick advertisement campaign said that the business is now closing.
7722	The Packers dropped into a tie with the Vikings for first place in the NFC North Division, both with 8-3 records.
7723	The page also explains the extra settings that have been added to the latest software.
7724	The paid version has the same features but comes without advertisements.
7725	The pair had a prototype used to give a demonstration of the device.
7726	The pair have been missing from our screens recently, after their characters were forced to go on the run when Stacey whacked Phil over the head in the Arches.
7727	The pair look like they’ve decided to put the drama of the last week behind them and focus on giving the best performance they can.
7728	The pair travelled to the site from County Durham on Sunday for a bit of summer sunshine beside the sea.
7729	The parade has taken on some additional significance this year after Ottawa Mayor Jim Watson days ago came out as openly gay after decades in public life.
7730	The parks department did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
7731	The participants enjoyed cutting the Sola stem to create their own designs.
7732	"The parties expect that the report of this investigation will examine topics related to several matters raised by the defendant," they wrote in the joint filing.
7733	“The part that bothers us, as police officers, is the way these murders are being committed.
7734	The party is possible because of Genvid’s cloud-based streaming technology.
7735	The party’s chairman in the state, Daniel Nwafor, addressing a press conference in Owerri on Saturday, said the National Chairman of the party, Adams Oshiomhole disregarded the rule of law in the suspension of governor Rochas Okorocha.
7736	The party will have to work hard to keep the riding.
7737	The passwords arenâ€™t considered very secure now, therefore, newer ways of authentication have been introduced.
7738	The past eight years have been some of the most challenging in my life.
7739	“The past five years have been amazing for the ASU System, and it has been a privilege to serve my alma mater and our incredible two-year institutions alongside my fellow trustees.
7740	The Pastor also defended himself, even if he didn’t offer an apology or an explanation on the relationship between him and the lady in question.
7741	The pastor himself was the one that asked me to go ahead and do it, to prove my innocence that I would not run away with the sister’s money.
7742	The past two times Whittaker has been scheduled to fight in Australia, at Perth Arena in February 2018 and Melbourne’s Rod Laver Arena in February 2019, he had to withdraw through injury or illness.
7743	The patients are mostly from Madibira B Village, one of the densely populated slums in Busia town.
7744	The patient, who turned 17 while hospitalized, was not identified.
7745	The pay of the information commissioner, Elizabeth Denham, has risen by a quarter year-on-year from about £195,000 to about £245,000.
7746	The PCI also cited norms of journalistic conduct Clause 23, which prescribes self-regulation in reporting by journalists in matters of sensitive national, social or individual interests.
7747	The Peacekeeper shotgun is getting slightly nerfed with two minor changes in the update that just went live this weekend.
7748	The Peach Pickers are a trio consisting of Rhett Akins, Dallas Davidson and Ben Hayslip, who are collectively and individually some of the most successful songwriters in contemporary country music.
7749	The Pentagon has awarded a USD 10 billion cloud computing contract called JEDI.
7750	The petition was addressed to the party's National Election Committee and copied to the Chairman of NDC's National Council of Elders, Jerry John Rawlings, NDC General Secretary, Johnson Asiedu Nketia, and party Chairman, Samuel Ofosu Ampofo.
7751	The phase two pilot would also increase permit and impound fees for companies and increase focus on the environmental impact of e-scooters, Lambert said.
7752	The phone packs a 4,000mAh battery with support for 30W VOOC Flash Charge 4.0 technology.
7753	The phony withdrawal from Syria is an important reminder that Trump’s foreign policy needs to be judged by what he does and not by what he says.
7754	The physios attended to Nandan, who was seen holding the back of his head.
7755	The pictures no longer exist.
7756	The plaintiff will be responsible for the new fees and advertising costs.
7757	The play debuted successfully earlier in the year at the Wole Soyinka Hall, Freedom Park, Lagos.
7758	“The PMO should be more concerned about what high-placed Liberals are saying than about trying to stifle or intimidate independent China watchers like me,” Mr. Mulroney said.
7759	The Poland striker took just 14 minutes and 31 seconds to net all four goals.
7760	The polarizing Swedish climate change activist has already visited Ottawa and Montreal.
7761	The police also alleged that one of their vehicles was vandalized by the rioters.
7762	The police and ambulance crews are wonderful.
7763	The police are currently tracing their whereabouts by analysing CCTV footage.
7764	The police however, filed one count charge against the defendants at the Federal High Court.
7765	The police in its response has been stating that they have made efforts to trace the girl but the child could not be recovered so far.
7766	The policemen did not allow anybody to come inside the hall.
7767	The police said on its official Twitter account that motorists are allowed to decorate their vehicles from November 25, until December 6, to maintain maximum traffic safety standards during the celebrations.
7768	The political focus on alternative energy spurred Jeremy Corbyn to pledge in May that 1.75m homes in Britain would be fitted with solar panels if Labour wins the next general election.
7769	The pooch – named after Spiderman’s alter ego Peter Parker – receives messages from fans around the world, including America and China.
7770	The poor are very poor and the rich have everything,” said Silvia Torres, 38.
7771	The poor attendance of BJP MPs has long been a sore issue for Modi, who had flagged the matter time and again even during the previous term of his government.
7772	The popular cleric was dwarfed by most of the players as he went around giving shoulder bumps and hugs, and saying a few words to thank the team for their work.
7773	The poster, draped over several stories of the Likud party’s headquarters building on the corner of King George and Ben Zion streets, shows the two leaders shaking hands under the slogan “Netanyahu: In a league of his own.”
7774	The post-intervention data shows that the number has increased to 61.76%,” said Kanhaiya Choudhary, CEO of N.M. Sadguru foundation.
7775	The post is one of 12 that Ankara established in the northwest under a deal with Moscow and Tehran two years ago to reduce fighting between Assad's forces and rebels.
7776	The preliminary NTSB report includes this photo of the intersection of routes 30 and 30A in Schoharie.
7777	The preliminary statewide figure was down from the 4.2 percent rate reported for January.
7778	The presence of an ice shelf normally checks the tendency of ice at the top of the ice sheet’s saucer to flow down glaciers into the sea.
7779	The President also urged people in Dowa to vote for ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) for continuation of developments his government is implementing in the district as well as the country.
7780	The president called on de Blasio to “act immediately” to the “completely unacceptable” behavior.
7781	The President of the Senate, Dr Ahmad Lawan, on Thursday, has said that there was no request before the 9th Senate for the confirmation of the acting Chairman of the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC).
7782	The President said South Africa needs to create opportunities that will empower young people.
7783	The president's chant of no obstruction is nonsense.
7784	The president’s company, the filing alleged, “used its control over the hotel bank accounts to make payments to itself and affiliates without withholding the 12.5 percent tax on its management fees, thus intentionally evading taxes.”
7785	The pressure has led to panic as senior officials blame each other for working with both internal and external foes to sabotage Mnangagwa’s efforts at reviving the economy.
7786	The price of this transaction was not released.
7787	The price tumbled lower.
7788	“The priest, he was a short man, pushed me into the corner behind a door against the wall and said it was a good hiding place.
7789	The Prime Minister is first among equals.
7790	"The prime minister needs to stop looking for distractions from the main game," he told reporters.
7791	“The principle that was so clearly articulated by John Paul II – that there’s no place in ministry for someone who harms a child – that has to be a line in the sand,” said during a news conference Friday.
7792	The private company has yet to reach an agreement with multiple state attorneys general to settle thousands of lawsuits alleging it fueled the nation's opioid crisis.
7793	The problem, however, was that the two never really found to each other.
7794	The problem is made worse by the widespread destruction of forests.
7795	The problem is they do not a have a clean competitor if there was one they would have been worried, but with HH leading the opposing party things can not turn around in the Zambian politics.
7796	The problem we have is that as citizens we tend to be gullible; politicians come to us and tell us that this road has been constructed because of me when in actual fact, this politician’s role is simply to lobby.
7797	The problem with this is, well, it’s extensive because of the issues that are involved, including the Braves’ payroll.
7798	The procedure involves using an individual’s natural imprint to make a mould, which is then cooked at 1500 degrees Celsius for durability, prior to being layered with various sorts of ceramic materials.
7799	The process is known as “supervised learning” and is currently the most popular way of doing deep learning.
7800	The product is made with proper research, and it is going to lower your hunger levels and provides a high metabolism.
7801	The program also supports those with non-combat serious illnesses – both mental and physical conditions – and injuries sustained in deployment, training or liberty accidents.
7802	The program offers master’s and specialist degrees that prepare professionals for fields such as teaching, school administration, student affairs and instructional technology.
7803	The program replaces old water fountains with new filtration and bottle filling stations in 21 schools throughout the state.
7804	The program which is administered by Animal Control is available to any county resident at a cost of $30 per animal.
7805	The progress in efforts to curb the United States’ freewheeling relationship with firearms came despite talks between Trump and the head of the fierce NRA gun lobby, Wayne LaPierre.
7806	The project also includes enhancements to the heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) system, ramps and doorways to insure the school meets Accessibility for Ontarians with Disabilities Act (AODA) standards.
7807	The project is expected to be completed within 42 months.
7808	“The promotional discount will expire at 11:59 p.m. (Pacific Time) on November 30th, 2019.”
7809	The property in Helensburgh, Argyll, is considered to be the architect's finest domestic project.
7810	The property is set in a medieval world with talking mice that are protected from threats by highly skilled warriors, the Mouse Guard.
7811	The proposal, one of four ideas being considered, is part of a cost saving initiative to take over funding licence fees from the government in 2020.
7812	The prosecution said the messages were direct evidence of a plan to corrupt the identification procedure.
7813	The prosecutor added: ‘On the day Peter McCaig was set to meet the girl, a team of volunteers had travelled to confront the defendant but on the way they received a message to say he was not coming.’
7814	The protester, who was sitting high up in the arena in the US city of Manchester, interrupted the president’s speech before security were called to escort him out.
7815	The province of Gelderland will only use green gas and sustainable electricity from next year, as part of a contract concluded with energy providers Greenchoice and Vattenfall, De Gelderlander reports.
7816	The public, he said, should “also be vigilant and cautious in identifying which religious group and churches they associate with.”
7817	The public is invited to attend and provide oral and/or written comments.
7818	The purpose of shifting brands toward body positivity is to accurately represent society, which fosters confidence and dignity in youth.
7819	The purpose of the Planning Board is to ensure things are in compliance with the code but instead they just want to make up new rules as they go along.
7820	The Q1 session started in dry conditions and warm late-summer sunshine with a welcome air temperature of 23 degrees Celsius and the track at 38, a near-perfect invitation for Ferrari to delight a big red crowd in the old Autodromo Nazionale.
7821	The qualifying rate had increased several times during 2017 and 2018 as the Bank of Canada raised its key interest rate, and as bond yields headed higher.
7822	The Queen hosted a private lunch at the palace, after which the President and Mrs Ivanka Trump viewed a special exhibition in the Picture Gallery, showcasing items of historical significance to the United States from the Royal Collection.
7823	The question is when will AB and Belichick end their relationship?
7824	'The question is whether or not the mayor can legally justify it by showing it's reasonable and there were no better alternative measures to reduce congestion.
7825	The questions he was pursuing were bigger than the 2020 election.
7826	The question that is lingering on many people's minds continues to be which of the incoming members is likely to take over the powerful position of Senate President.
7827	The question was basically- Are we related?
7828	The quickie wedding has many scratching their heads in regards to its speed and remarkably hidden status.
7829	The racist party that could save Netanyahu's political career in Tuesday's election - Israel Election 2019 - Haaretz.
7830	The Raiders are up next, abandoning there strong fan base, with even the possibility of Buffalo to San Antonio and longer term, the Jaguars to London where Mr. Khan really wants to be.
7831	The raids were meant to target roughly 2,000 undocumented immigrants who have already been ordered to be deported by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).
7832	The railway uses Chinese trains, Chinese construction companies, Chinese standards and specifications, and operated by the China Railway Group Limited (CREC) and China Civil Engineering Construction Corporation.
7833	The rain is expected to last into the afternoon with a very slow shift to the east as the morning progresses.
7834	The Ramlilas in the national capital have gained prominence ahead of the polls early next year.
7835	The rampage came about a month after a gunman from the Dallas area killed 22 people on Aug 3 at a Walmart store about 410km west of Midland in El Paso, Texas.
7836	“The rapidly-evolving security situation in the region requires an accelerated delivery of certain capabilities to U.S. partners in the region.”
7837	The Raptors ran over to goalie Nick Wagner and proceeded to jump around together with smiles on their faces and some players even had tears in their eyes.
7838	The rats were spotted by yesterday around 10 p.m. at the Jay Street-MetroTech station in Brooklyn.
7839	The Ravens are Super Bowl favorites behind dynamic quarterback Lamar Jackson.
7840	The reaction, a denial, came from the office of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation (OSGF).
7841	The real estate investment trust reported $0.01 EPS for the quarter, missing analysts’ consensus estimates of $0.45 by ($0.44).
7842	The real estate investment trust reported $0.85 earnings per share for the quarter, topping the Thomson Reuters’ consensus estimate of $0.83 by $0.02.
7843	The real estate investment trust reported $1.16 earnings per share for the quarter, topping the Thomson Reuters’ consensus estimate of $1.14 by $0.02.
7844	There are 3.5 million EU citizens currently living in the UK and most will have to apply via the scheme if they want to continue living in the country after June 2021.
7845	There are about 8 cars dumped off a dirt road on your left off Ridge Rd on Hope Hill as you approach the Church of God of Prophesy which is being re-built coming from the Tamarind Club junction.
7846	“There are a couple of reasons: one is obviously the factor.
7847	There are a few places to get knafeh in Anaheim's Little Arabia district and is one of the most popular.
7848	There are also going to be gamers who insist on fixating on these very problems.
7849	There are a number of these types of medications, offered in varying dosages.
7850	“There are cases around civil liberties and other policy issues which struggle to receive funding, even when they’re backed by high-quality legal teams, raising issues that most of us would regard as important,” Maugham says.
7851	There are countless cards and items to collect in a process that can take about two weeks to complete.
7852	“There are different things we have practiced throughout the years getting ready for such an incident like this,” Hornell Fire Chief Frank Brzozowski told reporters at a news conference on Monday.
7853	There are email security solutions that can alert you to these discrepancies by checking the links and domain, such as gateway security technology.
7854	There are formulas, it is math and it does sort of work itself out.
7855	There are invasive weeds and then, there is Japanese knotweed.
7856	There are multiple lane reductions Monday morning after a crash left a light standard listing at Hunt Club Road and Riverside Drive.
7857	There are no agencies that put out 'these are best practices when restraining inmates,'" says Firman.
7858	There are no guarantees that the major actor Kevin Feige has in mind for his movie is an MCU vet, but it stands to reason and it certainly seems possible that Brie Larson has already spoken to Kevin Feige about the part.
7859	There are no harmful fumes or fuel allowing them to be used indoors, nearer the appliances or tools.
7860	'There are no reported injuries and there is nothing to suggest this incident is terror related at this time.'
7861	There aren’t a lot of reasons to watch the current version of the Buccaneers (1-2), but Shaquil Barrett makes things interesting when Tampa Bay’s defense is on the field.
7862	There aren’t even exceptions for pregnancies caused by rape or incest.
7863	There are numerous exhibits that you will enjoy – from archeological to Fine Art collections.
7864	There are occasions when a batter, their form lost and their nerves shot, are able to play an innings only of scrambled minds and scrambled shots.
7865	There are old helmets, uniforms, body armour and handcuffs people can try on.
7866	There are plenty of different online brokers.
7867	There are roughly 12,000 to 13,000 American troops currently in Afghanistan.
7868	There are several metal finishes to the cases: aluminum, stainless steel and in Series 5 only, titanium or ceramic finishes.
7869	There are several similar cases where D-voter notices from tribunal courts have been issued against the same person.
7870	There are six grandchildren, Ryan Carman, Kristyn Wooten, Alex ”Wooger” Smith, Ben Smith, Heather Soos andRaeanne Sowers.
7871	There are some of the recommendations that do not take into consideration some of the improvement, some of the accountability and openness made by INEC before the 2019 general elections.
7872	"There are some states that have low salary structure, they have to discuss something higher than what we had with the FG.
7873	There are still plenty of unknowns with Stadia.
7874	There are technical adjustments made in outdoor televisions to make them appropriate for outdoor use.
7875	There are there advantages and disadvantages to each live-action and animation.
7876	There are times that the game holds your hand that will feel irritating if you’re an adult, especially in its earliest hours.
7877	“There are two sides to the story.
7878	The reason behind this confusion is a complex classification of bank credit.
7879	The reason I knew that the plastic rice story was BS was that bulk recycled HDPE is $410/ton, rice is $430/ton, less than 5% more and in that 5% you need to clean, melt, and form the plastic into rice shapes, not going to happen.
7880	"The reason I'm here tonight is that I'm worried about our democracy surviving," said Dave Stinson, a financial analyst from Andover who showed up at the Blaine meeting.
7881	“The reason why I wanted to do the CBYX scholarship was to really get out and see the world for what it really is.
7882	Thereâ€™s something fresh about having to perform at your highest level because not only is a an audience watching but so is a camera and eventually the whole internet.
7883	The Rebels offense showed no early season rust in moving the ball as all scoring plays came within the red zone.
7884	Thereby making PSG’s shirts one place where the two opposing gulf blockade foes can live in self-promoting peace.
7885	The receiving chip in your TV can also influence whether or not a passive cable will work over long distances—if it’s better at adjusting for a weaker signal, you won’t need the signal boost.
7886	The recommendations included changes to Australia’s Privacy Act, an independent ombudsman to resolve disputes for consumers and businesses, new codes of conduct, and a system for the digital platforms to negotiate with news organisations.
7887	The record for the most goals in a Premier League season (34) is jointly held by two players.
7888	“There couldn’t be a more appropriate time to remind people that, if you see something suspicious or that seems off, say something.
7889	The RedHawks capitalized after gaining possession.
7890	The Red Lake Tribal Police Department and the FBI Headwaters Safe Trails Task Force investigated the robbery, the release said.
7891	There dope may be "legal" but that doesn't make it morally right and the law needs to be fixed accordingly.
7892	Therefore it’s very important that you’re able give and to create a CV into the very best of your abilities.
7893	The regularity and consistency in convening these deliberations are a testimony to the strength and depth of our relations.
7894	“There has also been potential discrimination against fixed-term workers.
7895	There has been a slow churn of exclusive games on the Xbox One, though they have lacked the quality and quantity of what Sony has been releasing for the PS4.
7896	There has been a string of celebrity burglaries in Los Angeles in the past year.
7897	There has never been a more important time to ensure that we vote to undo cuts to the judicial service.
7898	"There have been four hospital closures, all in the rural area.
7899	There have been people in shows I’ve watched and my shows over the years who have gotten it so very wrong — not intentionally or maliciously — but because thinking about societal ills and power dynamics just wasn’t something they were ever taught to do.
7900	There have been several high level meetings on this," said one person close to the negotiations.
7901	“The reigning Concacaf Gold Cup champion recovered well from the shock, however, with Sebastian Cordova cutting onto his left foot and blasting in a shot from outside the box in the 27th minute to draw things even.
7902	The reigning world champ will take on The Fiend at the pay-per-view in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia on Oct. 31 in a Falls Count Anywhere match.
7903	There is a great deal of work to be done by the protagonists.”
7904	"There is a lot of work ahead of us," said Willmar Mayor Marv Calvin.
7905	There is a lot to sum up here.
7906	There is also no evidence that bay leaves or spearmint gum placed in the cupboard will prevent grain moths.
7907	“There is always a chance that these things happen but it is what it is … at this stage he (Cotchin) is playing and we’ll work our way through that if something changes,” Richmond coach Damien Hardwick said.
7908	There is a need for learners to practice as often as possible under the supervision of an Approved Driving Instructor (ADI) or a sponsor (trusted friends and family members intended to help you boost confidence while you take your lessons).
7909	There is an Instagram account called FuckJerry, which grew by taking jokes and memes created by other people and posting them, eventually growing an audience hungry for ever more jokes.
7910	"There is a protocol for when families seek asylum and it does not include locking them away in maximum security prisons in the middle of nowhere."
7911	There is a wide variety of products you can choose from, including food, toys, clothing and many more.
7912	There is no alternative location for the ice rink, which was custom made for St Andrew Square.
7913	“There is no better time to build a bridge between tourism businesses in need of motivated and forward-thinking employees and local high school and community college students who seek rewarding employment and, ultimately, successful careers.”
7914	There is no charge to participate and no commitment to attend weekly.
7915	"There is no contest over it, but we are living nothing to chance," Gachie said.
7916	"There is no direct equivalent to Hedera Hashgraph today," said Martha Bennett, a principal analyst at Forrester Research.
7917	There is no logic in increasing prices based on parallel market exchange rate, but peg salaries on inflation.
7918	“There is no way that this intended or had the effect of causing physicians to overlook the fact that it was twice as potent.
7919	The rejection was a pivotal moment which sparked the Umbrella Movement in 2014.
7920	“The relationship between a husband and wife is based on mutual acceptance.
7921	The relationship between the clubs was typically frosty.
7922	The reliance on petroleum to boost tax revenues has carried on for too long.
7923	There likely will be more to come as the agency continues to pursue crypto-fraud cases.
7924	There’ll be something of a wait before that happens, however.
7925	There margins are being squeezed as interest rates get closer to zero," Mr Greenwood said.
7926	There might be fewer arguments about bathrooms, for starters.
7927	The remuneration committee and the board of directors have taken on record the same.”
7928	The report also said policies for PWDs were ineffective due to weak implementation, insufficient funding, and inadequately focused integrative government programs, citing information from advocacy groups in the country.
7929	The report concluded that the supervisor violated the state NAACP's sexual harassment policy.
7930	The report found “sufficient credible evidence regarding the responsibility of the Crown Prince demanding further investigation.”
7931	The report has recommended other key steps such as music grants and export schemes to develop a supporting ecosystem that is conducive to micro, small and medium enterprises, larger enterprises as well as start-ups.
7932	The report ranks 190 nations based on ten parameters, which includes ease of starting a business, construction permits, getting electricity, getting credit, paying taxes, trade across borders, enforcing contracts and resolving insolvency.
7933	The report said the shooting took place at around 3 p.m. on Monday in the 6200 block of S. Lindbergh Boulevard between Tesson Ferry Road and Interstate 55 in St. Louis County.
7934	There's a "For Sale" sign hanging on the fence — Chen has had enough, and plans to shut the shop down.
7935	"There's a lack of available development sites, with the situation unlikely to improve in the near future due to geographical constraints and shortage of freehold land.
7936	There’s a long time between now and August.
7937	There’s a lot of directives you could have given us throughout this time to help us improve our meetings.
7938	“There’s a lot of movement in the play — especially when the boats are on the water — and that’s attractive to me as a director,” says Firlit.
7939	There’s also a certain amount of stigma associated with the trade in a society that considers death taboo.
7940	There’s also a “Marvelous” dinner at the hotel’s restaurant — think matzo-ball soup, brisket, latkes — and “Marvelous” cocktails like the Midge, gin, fresh strawberry purée, cane sugar, lime, and cayenne pepper.
7941	There's also hipster bar Heartattack and Vine, the redeveloped King and Godfree, as well as old favourites Jimmy Watson's, Tiamo and Cinema Nova.
7942	There’s also wireless charging for your smartphone, and a 360-degree front camera with split-view.
7943	There's a Mothra character that recalls Nishimura's mother.
7944	There's an elegant living room, ready to welcome you, along with the great room, flanked by a fireplace and flowing outdoors to the poolside entertaining area.
7945	There’s a new ad hoc communications network police hope will increase public safety.
7946	There’s an old saying that “free advice is worth what you pay for it,” but as two people who greatly admire the former vice president and who care about the fate of our country, we say, “Let it rip, Joe!”
7947	There’s a question that audiences will inevitably ask themselves at the end of : where were the diapers?
7948	There’s a reason for this, and if you think about it for a minute, you might be able to figure it out.
7949	Theres a rumor afoot that someone wants to remake ‘Princess Bride’ which is a terrible idea.
7950	There’s a view among some that the security agencies have too much influence in respect of China, so it is hard to make the case that they needed a tutorial from a committee chair.
7951	There’s been a ton of work put in to this from the product and design perspective to find out, with how many people on Facebook, how to make this as representative as possible” Facebook Avatars communication manager Jimmy Raimo said per TechCrunch.
7952	There’s been plenty of speculation about Flo’s dad thanks to some recent casting news.
7953	“There’s definitely been some interest, in speaking to other provinces, on what the CEC will be doing.”
7954	The researchers found out that there is water at 12 kilometres into Earth's crust, despite this previously being thought to be impossible.
7955	The researchers, led by Ana-Maria Vilcu of Sorbonne University in Paris, said that because heartburn drugs work to reduce acid, it might increase the risk of infection as stomach acid plays a role in keeping viruses at bay.
7956	The research showed that half the recruits were illiterate and the other half had more than two years of secondary education.
7957	There’s even more bamboo suspended from the ceiling in the glass atria.
7958	“There’s just a long history of oppression and exclusion when it comes to education and education rights.“
7959	There’s no comparison.
7960	There’s no debate to be had: Chicagoans love dogs.
7961	There’s no excuse for allowing twenty point runs against your team in three of the last four games.
7962	“There’s no legal action or anything like that happening right now.
7963	There’s no quick test for the parasite, in part because so much about it remains unknown.
7964	There’s nothing else like it on the market, and it’s mostly a joy to use despite a middling keyboard and awful speakers.
7965	There's nothing worse than losing your data in an intensely grind-driven loot game and the devs need to patch this up as soon as possible.
7966	The resolution passed unanimously.
7967	"There's quite a bit of debate in our research community: How much of the benefits of intermittent fasting are just due to the fact that it helps people eat less?
7968	There's sunshine beaming throughout the place, and on almost every face.
7969	The rest of the recovered meat has been buried, said police.
7970	The rest of the time it had to foster oil and gas development.
7971	“The rest of the time we are working so we get to watch the games on television or a live feed.
7972	The rest of us still have the instinct to cooperate.
7973	The restriction was an additional one, over and above PCA, on the bank,” said Sanjay Kumar, Executive Director, United Bank of India.
7974	The result is a toned, radiant look, with the particles stimulating cell-renewal and eliminating pigmentation.
7975	The results are the musical equivalent of an H&M pastel-floral romper, somehow both party-ready and wallpaper-like.
7976	The results found participants were more likely to share embarrassing stories (open up to others) after physical exercise.
7977	The results of its attempts make a bull in the china shop look like a meticulous curator in the British Museum.
7978	The results produced a sharper and more violent Felder.
7979	"The results were very promising: we saw a 75 per cent increase in the number of unique games visited, and a 48 per cent increase in the average visits per game."
7980	The Reunification Railway runs from the capital, Hanoi, in the north of Vietnam, to the economic powerhouse of Ho Chi Minh City (formerly Saigon) in the south, says Peter Ford in the South China Morning Post.
7981	There was also a letter T.S. Eliot had written to his publisher that mentioned a gathering of “Jellicle Cats” that ended with a trip to the Heaviside Layer in a big air balloon.
7982	There was a time some two decades ago that I was hired to be personal legal counsel to a famous billionaire.
7983	There was, however, no crew aboard the spacecraft, just a test dummy named Ripley, in a nod to the lead character in the Alien movies.
7984	There was much more to King Henry’s reign than luxurious parties.
7985	“There was no correspondence from the FA regarding an interest in Ngwenya,” said Phakathi.
7986	There was no one Florida who was in position to bring down the big man.
7987	There was no reason why the man would run from the scene and so the team interrogated Ikande.
7988	“There was nothing behind it.”
7989	There was no use setting lots of detailed advice into a CV which will not add any worth, and also in actuality, just dilutes the result.
7990	There was plenty of laughter, color, and coughing abound.
7991	There were enough tomatoes to make another batch of passata for the week ahead, and though I took out some more plants to compost, there were still enough tomatoes left to warrant leaving them behind to see if the remaining tomatoes ripen.
7992	There were flames coming out of the top windows.”
7993	There were many moments in the last week where I felt shocked and gratified by the seriousness with which Fox was taking impeachment.
7994	There were more than 10 thousand people who were bussed out into the woods, executed there, and buried together in mass graves,” Vekselberg intimated, adding that 16 members of his own family died there.
7995	“There were more than 400 different types of chemicals were stacked up on the ground floor without proper segregation.
7996	There were multiple people living in units there.
7997	There were no reports of crowd disturbances and the German fans were led back to Victoria station after the game, where trains would take them to Dover and six cross-Channel steamers left after midnight, bound for Germany.
7998	There were no reports of shots being fired during the incident.
7999	There were numerous activities, and discussions on camping, Pinewood Derby Races, Team Building, New Friendships, Pack Adventures with your family and earning Adventure Belt Loops.
8000	There were two dog attacks on sheep belonging to Mr Walker in the spring of 2018, after which 11 animals died or were put down.
8001	There will also be a jetty for mooring of a floating liquefied natural gas unit, which will be permanently moored, and where LNG carriers will be loaded.
8002	“There will be about twice as many cars and just as much, if not more chaos, and some of the biggest fireworks in the state afterward,” Trolard said.
8003	There will be another Commission on Marginal Farmers and Agriculture Labour to advise on policies on income from non-crop based agriculture such as horticulture, floriculture, poultry etc.
8004	There will be door prizes at the free event.
8005	There will be memorial tributes for Ben Green and Joe Nathan Kelly.
8006	There will be no delivery and collection service from Christmas Day through to Boxing day, however normal service will resume on Friday, December 27.
8007	There will be no tuition or textbook costs, according to the report.
8008	“There will not be any solutions or plans presented in line with these figures here today, because these numbers are too uncomfortable and you are still not mature enough to tell it like it is,” Thunberg added.
8009	“There would definitely be no margin for error in the first two matches.
8010	‘The Richards offers 135 comfortable rooms and one of the drawcards is the state-of-the-art conference facilities.
8011	The 'Ring of Fire' is a horseshoe-shaped geological disaster zone that is a hot bed for tectonic and volcanic activity.
8012	The rise in the market of GPS ‘jammers’, devices which are plugged into car cigarette lighters and can stop tracking systems, can interfere with other signals beyond the one they intend to block.
8013	The roads are in pretty good shape, Olson said.
8014	The roast-style blog, which was a shortly after I reached out to SB Nation executive director John Ness for comment, had a disclosure at the top telling the reader that it was satire.
8015	The rookie is winless in his past six outings.
8016	The Roomba i7 and i7+ are pricey but worthwhile higher-tier options featuring self-emptying dustbins.
8017	The rooms in which the craft are built are cleaner and more sterile than any operating theatre.
8018	The room was often used for meetings, and people smoked (a lot, I assume), and you could actually see the deterioration from smoke.
8019	The Roosters held an 8-0 lead at the break after a huge try to Boyd Cordner off a Daniel Tupou leap.
8020	The rotunda dome now sports a mural commemorating graduation and VSU history, while also showing unity between VSU’s various colleges.
8021	The ruling APC did not oppose the selling off of the NNPC, but they made sure to keep quiet throughout the campaign period on this question.
8022	The ruling party lost the constitutional majority in the Parliament several months ago; so, it will need the opposition’s support to endorse the proportional system from 2020.
8023	The S10 Plus has a vapor chamber cooling system to dissipate heat during intense gameplay.
8024	The sad part is their unwillingness to accept responsibility or to adjust their products to minimize that damage.
8025	The Saints also have had mixed results under Payton, now the league’s second-longest tenured coach.
8026	The sale closed Nov. 14 for a premium, marking a new chapter for a property that was supposed to be bigger than it is, faced litigation and went into foreclosure years ago.
8027	The saltiest was in Spring Lake in Spring Lake Park.
8028	The Samba Boys were amazingly wasteful this half and that should be a worry for Tite.
8029	The same applies for appointments to EU institutions: to control that sort of thing, one needs to be in government, and, ideally, in charge of it.
8030	The same process happens when seeking a camping location except the map to reach for is the DeLorme Atlas and Gazetteer (delorme.com). These map sets are available for all 50 states at $19.95 each or groups of 5-6 for $74.95.
8031	The sample must also be representative of all skin colours and all different shapes of people’s faces and eyes.
8032	The saying permission letter is employed to be symbol of a correspondence that can be written to enable an individual permission to do a specific work, for instance, going for a fieldtrip.
8033	The scene was reminiscent of Day 2, when Tomokaze sustained a serious right knee injury that saw him join the growing list of withdrawals in Fukuoka.
8034	The scheme involved some Zimra officials, who produced falsified customs clearing certificates used to register the cars.
8035	“The scheme of illegal extraction of organs from residents of Serbia was carried out on the territory where Le Mesurier was staying, and exactly the same system was recreated in Syria.
8036	The school will likely use some of its considerable wealth to challenge the damages award, and an appellate court could well knock it down — perhaps significantly.
8037	The science behind the overall importance of preventing extinction is clear.
8038	The scientists were among the most prominent people in their fields and many were professors at Harvard and MIT.
8039	The scooter has three wheels (two in front, one in back), and it can supposedly use artificial intelligence and remote cloud capabilities to guide itself without a human rider.
8040	The score at the end of the half was big to get the score tied at halftime.
8041	The score is your vote, and with it, your God-given, citizenship-endowed share of Nigeria’s resources for the next four years.
8042	The Scottish secretary said people were "concerned about Mr Johnson's behaviour" and accused him of trying to create the "maximum amount of distraction and headlines for himself".
8043	The scripture was read by Vilakuo Mezhier, Rüsoma BKK.
8044	The Seahawks struggled against the Ravens in Week 7 and Wilson threw his first interception of the year.
8045	These all work well and serve their functions properly, with the alarm clock being a minor exception.
8046	The search committee that will select longtime UCLA athletic director Dan Guerrero’s replacement is made up entirely of university officials.
8047	“These are great promising works,” says artist Sudharshan Shetty, who curated the third edition of Kochi-Muziris Biennale in 2016.
8048	These are just a few of the many properties the MV Land Bank deems safe for walking during hunting season.
8049	“These are the types of dwellings we are looking for and the renderings are very nice,” she said.
8050	These are things I would have never understood and stayed ignorant about.
8051	The seaside town of Mexico Beach was just a dot on the map before Hurricane Michael, a Category 5 storm, swept ashore last October, obliterating everything in its path.
8052	The seasoning is absolutely spot on.”
8053	These can include tinned dog food for our older dogs and puppies, puppy milk, dog toys, dog collars and leads.
8054	“These cases, along with confirmed cases in horses and deer in the state, stress the importance of taking precautions against mosquito bites.”
8055	The second catch: These stations will only juice an electric car up for 30 minutes.
8056	The second film ‘Once Upon A Time In Anatolia’ is a rigorous tale of a night and a day in a murder investigation.
8057	“The second I heard their dream, I wanted to support it,” said Kahn.
8058	The second is this notion of ayin, which is the transition from infinity to the particular, created world.
8059	The second part of that trust is explicit: something that has to be communicated, learned, something of which we are consciously aware.
8060	The second rank was secured by Bhavik Bansal from Delhi and the third all-India topper was Akshat Kaushik from Uttar Pradesh.
8061	The sectional from Lee Industries is one of the only brand-new pieces in the house, and the colorful window treatments—just enough for privacy—were made with Athens-based Hable Construction Textiles.
8062	These days, a lot of young men enjoy dating older and experienced ladies.
8063	These days Saudis and Americans work together on all global problems.
8064	These elections offer an opportunity to craft a more conciliatory policy towards the people of J&K.
8065	These emotions that are swimming around your being will always make you moving in a haze, that sometimes it is hard to keep up with the manual labor needs of moving out.
8066	These factors highlight the need to improve the understanding of how cryptocurrencies work.
8067	These five guys showed they still have work to do this preseason and camp.
8068	The segregation-era road-trip drama has been dogged by controversy after it was widely criticized as an outdated, sentimentalized movie full of racial stereotypes.
8069	These handles are spreading fake information or reply in a manner inconsistent with professional etiquette.
8070	“These homes will help alleviate those wait times and allow officers to have a smoother transition to Fort Lee so they can focus on their mission instead of housing needs,” Frenz said.
8071	These included an appearance for the Scotland over-60s team in an international cross-country match against the other “home countries”.
8072	These include everything from the inanimate Fire-Bars to the final Bowser.
8073	These latest reports of crossings came on Tuesday as Turkey said it could not cope with a rise in the number of migrants from Syria.
8074	“These lights are a great example where we have been able to adapt the usual standards to better suit the local environment.
8075	These little, but significant changes will assist you in getting the perfect cake supplementations the celebration a rewards.
8076	These meets are staggered throughout the year and athletes can qualify for competitions in their respective levels.
8077	The Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior is struggling to show even that.
8078	The Senate GOP alternative to tolls is creative, but requires depleting two-thirds of the state's budget reserves.
8079	The Senate has already passed an appropriations bill paying for Medicaid expansion as approved by voters with no work requirements.
8080	The Senate president urged his colleagues to roll up their sleeves for the daunting tasks ahead, which he said, must begin in earnest.
8081	The senator from Vermont wins the backing of the congresswoman from New York, a major coup and a potential blow to Sen. Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts.
8082	The senator said she would shift the country’s industrial policy towards the production of green technology by increasing government research and development into green energy, restricting manufacturing to the United States and selling to a global market.
8083	These payments raise several questions.
8084	These people can't even give expression to their trauma because they are constantly under surveillance.
8085	These platforms also offer significant value-added features, such as rapid integration and development, as well as advanced data visualization.
8086	The Sept. 26 workshops are set to start at 2 and 7 p.m. at the landfill, 19111 Kittyhawk Ave. Those who participate get a metal food-scrap bucket for their kitchens, a scale and an outdoor compost bin.
8087	The sequel to the first game has a more exciting story than the first.
8088	These rapid responses suggest they had contingency plans for a variety of situations and available manpower to make meaningful changes on the fly.
8089	“These recorded progress can be linked to far reaching reforms introduced by Mr. fowler in areas of regular and continous taxpayers education, ICT innovation drive and taxpayers enlightments amongst others.
8090	These regulations are designed to help meet fisheries objectives for particular lakes and would be different from the regulations that apply statewide or to major zones of the state.
8091	The series’ creator apparently requested Labrinth write a score with both “hip-hop influence” and “gospel-orchestral influence,” which fit nicely into Labrinth’s existing musical style.
8092	The series shifted to Cartoon Network in 2009 as a series and continued for a while.
8093	The service members vacated the outpost after the incident but returned Saturday, according to a U.S. official and images circulating on social media.
8094	"These screenshots, you'll find them all over the place.
8095	These shaft spillways have been nicknamed bellmouth or morning glory - after the flower - spillways.
8096	These sugars are responsible for the sweet flavour of roast pumpkin and butternut-squash soup, and also trigger a cascade of knock-on chemical reactions, such as the production of carotenes.
8097	These terms ought to be interpreted to refer not to the rights of children who receive basic education, but adults attending learning institutions to obtain something over and above basic education."
8098	These traditional notions of masculinity tend to favour stoicism and dominance.
8099	These two skeletons are now known to be both males.
8100	These weren't narrow defeats for Republican legislators.
8101	“These women are carrying the bulk of the load in order to call us to action, and as a country, we have to step up.”
8102	These women had all really deliberated about coming forward.
8103	These young bowlers have to get match winning performances and people have to tell that's a match winning bowler.
8104	The SFA declined to comment.
8105	The shale revolution may have unlocked vast amounts of new supply, but now the world is drowning in it.
8106	The shares were bought at an average price of $21.40 per share, with a total value of $25,680.00.
8107	The shares were sold at an average price of $112.37, for a total transaction of $112,370.00.
8108	The shares were sold at an average price of $14.73, for a total transaction of $515,697.30.
8109	The shares were sold at an average price of $45.52, for a total transaction of $311,493.36.
8110	The shares were sold at an average price of $54.61, for a total value of $1,487,139.52.
8111	The shark tried to take off with the tarpon, but it was still on the fishing line.
8112	The Shift key physically shifted the internals of the typewriter, so it took some effort to press it down.
8113	The shiny new bar is engulfed by fashionable drinkers standing three deep in hopes of getting an order in while jockeying for the best spot to be noticed.
8114	The shipment of iron ore increased by 8 percent, non-ferrous ore by 5 percent and construction materials by 6 percent compared to 2017,” reads the release.
8115	The ship was delivered to the Navy in February, and left the shipyard for Mayport earlier this month.
8116	The shocking footage was captured on Mr Hussain's dash cam.
8117	The shooter’s identity and motive have yet to be released, though police described him as a white man in his mid-30s.
8118	The shooter that injured Giffords expressed paranoia about government and became obsessed with Giffords.
8119	The short spot, titled “Stay Playful,” also features new music from Wiz.
8120	The show follows two fictional agents Bill Tench (Holt McCallany) and Holden Ford (Jonathan Groff) who establish the fledging behavioural science unit alongside academic Wendy Carr (Anna Torv).
8121	The show host learns that Yoo is receiving a government pension, which helps a little, but not enough.
8122	The show picks up new millennial fans all the time.
8123	The show was funny, heartfelt, and more realistic that I thought it would be.
8124	The signing of the two documents was carried out on the occasion of the meeting of the Vice President of Iran Dr. Sattari with the Indonesian Minister of Health.
8125	The sign on the shop asking for donations.
8126	The since Mad Max: Fury Road.
8127	The singer who recently released an album ” Moral Instruction”, in which some tracks took shots at moral decadence in the Nigerian society said this in an interview with Silverbird television.
8128	The site was highly professional, offering an escrow service for large transactions, along with an arbitration system for when disputes between cybercriminals arose.
8129	The situation in Delhi does not seem to be getting better.
8130	The situation might be changing, albeit gradually.
8131	“The situation of Eden is different.
8132	The situations that we put her in — I just could not imagine any other actress doing that.
8133	The six-foot-six pitcher was selected by the Diamondbacks in the fourth round of the 2016 draft and was traded to the Rays in 2017 in exchange for right-hander Brad Boxberger.
8134	The slightly ambitious Edward Pintos-Oliver of Cabarita has a five-point plan for changing Australia’s weather patterns.
8135	The smugglers' arrest in Hanoi follows a record seizure in Singapore this week of nearly nine tonnes of ivory and a huge stash of pangolin scales destined for Vietnam.
8136	The socialist government is now in caretaker mode, following the Parliament vote, and PM Viorica Dăncilă said she hopes the president will quickly appoint a new prime minister.
8137	The society and the library have worked together over the years under the leadership of Fred and Ann Bischoff to hang locally-made quilts for the public to enjoy.
8138	The solution Blocher and Gulati suggested, giving the purchased territories' residents the purchasing nations' citizenship, wouldn't change much: Puerto Ricans, for example, are U.S. citizens but they don't really enjoy U.S. living standards.
8139	The solution colleagues and I came up with was to use a technique called photogrammetry – where the body size of the whales was measured from aerial photographs taken by drones.
8140	The son looked at the factory's carding machine - which helped turn fibres into yarn - and wondered if he could adapt it to roll cigarettes.
8141	“The South and parts of the West have started their flu season, while other parts of the country are still seeing little flu activity.”
8142	“The space in between trees was wide enough so that settlers could bring their wagons … through the trees.”
8143	The spacewalk, known as an extra-vehicular activity (EVA) in astronaut jargon, took place seven months after the original planned date for an all-female outing, which had to be scrapped because the ISS had only one medium-sized spacesuit on board.
8144	The SPCA is currently campaigning to rehome Poppy, a 13-year-old Jack Russell terrier currently in their Caithness and Sutherland centre who has been overlooked for 280 days.
8145	The Speaker of the Delta State House of Assembly, Rt Hon Sheriff Oborevwori has congratulated the state Governor, Senator Dr Ifeanyi Okowa on his victory at the election petition tribunal.
8146	The special meeting came after a last-minute date change for the interviews with the final three.
8147	The specie, native to Mumbai, is protected under Schedule 1 of Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.
8148	The spent Peacekeeper booster and abort system also impacted the ocean, sending plumes of water hundreds of feet into the air.
8149	The Sri Lankan presidential elections are taking place Saturday, the results of which are expected to be declared by Monday.
8150	The stable billionairing of Steve Ballmer down the hall makes the Clippers like the smarter play.
8151	The staff at Accutel is very attentive, easy to deal with and respond quickly to our questions & needs.
8152	The stage is getting ready for the seventh season of Bigg Boss Kannada.
8153	The standard Navigator is 210 inches long (about 18 feet), 93.8 inches wide with the mirrors (about eight feet) and 76.3 inches tall (about six feet).
8154	The Staples Community Arts & Craft Fair is 9 a.m.-3 p.m. Saturday, Nov. 23, at the Staples Community Center, 425 Fourth St. NE.
8155	The start of US-EU trade war?
8156	The star was seen posing in the doorway of a sliding glass door.
8157	The state and local governments have done much to drive up the cost of housing, the largest asset most people will ever own.
8158	"The State Department is running away from me," he added.
8159	The state government is likely to spell out more financial sops to bring small and marginal farmers within the institutional credit bracket to enable them avail fresh crop loans in financial year 2019-20.
8160	The statement announced that security agencies from Ghana and their Togolese counterparts on November 19, 2019 began a joint security operation simultaneously along their borders and selected areas within their national territories.
8161	The statement called for "providing the minimum appropriate climate for the start of the studies before the universities are actually opened".
8162	The statement noted the Equality Act undermines the rights of women and girls by forcing them to share private facilities, such as restrooms or locker rooms, with anyone claiming to identify as a woman.
8163	The statement said the device had a 6.15-inch Dewdrop FHD+ panel with a resolution of 2312 x 1080, and provides a stunning display quality.
8164	The statement said the implementation of these technical rules will be undertaken by Ethiopia but may be adjusted by all three countries in accordance with water conditions in any given year.
8165	The statement said the video would still be available online, behind an interstitial marked “sensitive media” that users would have to click to access the content.
8166	The statement signed by Mr. It’s said the media committee was not surprised that, “eight of the so-called 15 candidates are already distancing themselves from the purported endorsement.”
8167	The state’s case was presented by Prosecutor Seeta Bishundial.
8168	The state spent $600,000 in federal funds in 2017 to add a right-turn lane for motorists turning from Rt.
8169	“The state survey agency identifies two to three facilities from the lowest 20% that have demonstrated a special need for more oversight due to history of deficiencies, staffing levels and/or quality outcomes,” she said.
8170	The status of Gibraltar and its 30,000 residents have been gaining attention amid the uncertainty around Britain’s exit from the EU, whether with a deal or without, with questions over free movement across its land and sea borders with Spain.
8171	The stock currently has a consensus rating of “Hold” and a consensus price target of $28.
8172	The stock had a trading volume of 17,504 shares, compared to its average volume of 1,013,750.
8173	The stock has a 50-day moving average of $265.34 and traded as low as $259.00.
8174	The stock has a 50 day moving average of $46.31 and a 200-day moving average of $47.79.
8175	The stock has a 50-day moving average price of C$9.28 and a 200-day moving average price of C$7.49.
8176	The stock has a market cap of $1.15 billion, a price-to-earnings ratio of 5.83 and a beta of 1.46.
8177	The stock has a market cap of $12.05 million and a PE ratio of -9.17.
8178	The stock has a market cap of $12.99 billion, a price-to-earnings ratio of 70.35 and a beta of 0.17.
8179	The stock has a market cap of $5.05 million, a PE ratio of -0.25 and a beta of 1.04.
8180	The stock has a market cap of $5.81 billion, a price-to-earnings ratio of 14.76, a P/E/G ratio of 1.22 and a beta of 1.72.
8181	The stock presently has a consensus rating of “Buy” and an average price target of $150.
8182	The stock prices of National Oilwell Varco each fell between 16% and 23% last month, weighed down by slumping oil prices and credit concerns.
8183	The stock’s 50-day simple moving average is $17.67.
8184	The stock was acquired at an average price of $50.74 per share, for a total transaction of $253,700.00.
8185	The stock was bought at an average cost of GBX 2,536 ($33.14) per share, with a total value of £50,720 ($66,274.66).
8186	The stock was purchased at an average cost of $34.17 per share, with a total value of $158,070,351.66.
8187	The stock was sold at an average price of $139.25, for a total transaction of $50,130.00.
8188	The stock was sold at an average price of $157.09, for a total value of $3,141,800.00.
8189	The stock was sold at an average price of $216.85, for a total value of $9,657,848.45.
8190	The stock was sold at an average price of $34.24, for a total value of $336,065.60.
8191	The stock was sold at an average price of $55.72, for a total transaction of $1,788,277.68.
8192	The storms are expected to hit from between 2pm and 9pm.
8193	The story behind their journey began in 2013 when Masoud, who lived in Iran's capital Tehran with his widowed mother, five brothers and sister, was manager of Iran's national boating team.
8194	The story is a built around something called the Orca, a biosonar machine that can talk to the animals, Rex Harrison-style.
8195	The story is pretty gruesome at times.
8196	TheStreet upgraded shares of Vereit from a “c” rating to a “b-” rating in a research note on Friday, August 9th.
8197	The strike means about 2,000 workers have been on temporary layoff since Sept. 20 at GM's assembly plant in Oshawa, Ont. They were on a line that makes Chevrolet Impalas and Cadillacs.
8198	The strike took place at 15 Henry St. in front of a federal building that includes the regional office of Sen. Chuck Schumer.
8199	The students are without food, and only have blankets to keep warm while spending hours isolated from the rest of the community.
8200	The students were treated for minor injuries at St. Luke’s Hospital in New Bedford, and the bus driver sustained “some injuries but is doing well,” Dartmouth Public Schools wrote on Facebook.
8201	The study emphasizes the importance of using protective gear when handling pesticides on the job and including pesticide exposure in your medical history.
8202	The stunning Tran Quoc pagoda, which is the oldest temple in the Vietnamese capital, Hanoi.
8203	The subsidiary has been operating for about a year in Silver Spring, Maryland.
8204	The suggestion came after Trump.
8205	The Summer of 1969 was truly one for the record books.
8206	The support for these actions is a way of demonstrating that we too can rise above narrow self-interest.
8207	The Supreme Court had imposed a travel ban on him after he invoked the country’s constitution on January 23 to assume an interim presidency, which most Western nations now recognize as legitimate.
8208	The “Supreme Court Photo” with Patricia Nell Warren taken at home of Victor Burner.
8209	The Supreme Leader’s representative in Yazd province referred to popular discontent with increasing prices, criticizing the situation with the automotive industry in the country.
8210	The sushi and the vegan poke bowls, foods commonly consumed by younger people, symbolized the younger generation of Shaarei Shomayim members.
8211	The suspect driver remains at large.
8212	The suspect driver was picked up by a silver Toyota Corolla and the vehicle drove off.
8213	The suspects appeared in the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate's Court on 3 June 2019 and were remanded in custody.
8214	The suspect's mother, Fioraliza Rodriguez, 55, told the she had kicked him out about three years ago.
8215	“The suspects, who are currently undergoing investigation, were nabbed based on intelligence information.
8216	The suspect was taken into custody at the scene.
8217	The syllabus, the learners’ book, the teacher’s guide are on the tablet,” Mr. Bekele said during the handover of teaching tablets to the implementing partners on Friday morning in Juba.
8218	The symbolism of the speech – understated though it was compared to its modern manifestations – troubled the man from Monticello, who feared monarchical aggrandizement.
8219	The system, which went live in 2017, was developed to meet all state and federal standards for confidentiality, accessibility and security.
8220	Theta Fuel (TFUEL) traded down 15.2% against the dollar and now trades at $0.0173 or 0.00000201 BTC.
8221	The task force’s chairman, Philip M. Oliver, said federal classification standards were “totally inadequate … because there is no effective and cheap way to keep the standards current in view of changing technology, new programs and so on.”
8222	The taxpayer may have to foot the bill for casual 'double dipping', employers warn.
8223	The teachers said the governor emerged as winner of the award in recognition of his efforts in improving basic education and teachers’ welfare in the state.
8224	The team at Warehouse 72 are planning on incorporating special events to bring in the community like live music and charity nights.
8225	The team claimed Kaare Vedvik off of waivers from the Vikings on Sunday, making him the latest kicker to get a crack at solving one of the team’s big issues.
8226	The team is also removing the level crossing at High Street, Reservoir, and building the new Reservoir station.
8227	The team just reassigned longtime pitching coach Rick Honeycutt to a special assistant role after 14 seasons in charge of that side of the ball.
8228	The team promoted him to tight ends coach in 2011, and he stayed in that role until the Dolphins fired Joe Philbin four games into the 2015 season.
8229	The team’s current struggles have nothing to do with the receivers whatsoever.
8230	The teams will meet Saturday at Lamade Stadium, with the victor earning a place in the championship game against either Hawaii or Louisiana.
8231	The team that drafts Porter will do so based on flashes of promise that pop off the screen, not the consistency of his game tape.
8232	The team that was working on these, was temporarily disbanded and "reassigned to other product lines".
8233	The technocrats are focused on very technocratic things and when I speak to Palestinian people, what they want is they want the opportunity to live a better life,” Kushner replied.
8234	The technology allows for their lessons to be uploaded to the cloud, making them accessible at any time.
8235	The temporary restriction was out in place on September 16 2017 following a crash between a horsebox and two cars near Falfield, Gloucestershire, that saw five people lose their lives.
8236	The temptation to see what we want to see instead of what is actually there is ever-present, particularly in the realm of politics.
8237	The ten men of Arima looked as though they might just unlock the opposing defence for a third time to nick the result.
8238	The test isn’t as tough as the ACFT, but it’s incredibly difficult – even though it sounds easy as hell.
8239	The Test strips used in Perth, Melbourne and Sydney last summer were all rated as only "average" – one step above "below average" – by the International Cricket Council.
8240	The Texans then took the lead into the locker room after Mahomes was strip-sacked with 20 seconds left and Houston recovered, and Watson waltzed into the end zone on the very next play.
8241	The thatch-roof houses have disappeared.
8242	The thing is, music facilities in Mumbai mean a lot to me.
8243	The third grant is for $314,381 for study of alcohol and the final grant award is for $512,318 for mental health research.
8244	The third largest party once again would be the Joint Arab List with 13 seats – same as in the current Knesset.
8245	The third major achievement of the Ministry, Mr Kyei-Mensah Bonsu, highlighted was the engagement with the Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) and the Media with an overall objective to deepening transparency in relation to accountability.
8246	The threat level at the volcano had been raised in recent days, and questions are already being asked about whether it was safe for tour groups to visit.
8247	The three bodies (university (customer), telcos and towercos) brainstormed together in order to re-design the siting of masts on the campus.
8248	“The three most common factors with these incidents is usually careless handling, not knowing the safe zone of fire, and not knowing what’s beyond the target they’re shooting at,” Paurus said.
8249	The three Supreme Court judges who were vetted and approved by Parliament after the President nominated them were also sworn into office.
8250	The three-year old co-operative is a success story as it is able to generate employment for local women through a poultry farming project and a sewing project.
8251	The Tihar jail officials, who appeared before the court, informed that one of the convicts – Vinay withdrew his mercy petition and convict Mukesh and Akshay do not want to file a mercy petition.
8252	The timing of regulatory approval for the Max’s return has slipped repeatedly and remains uncertain with Boeing’s relationship with the Federal Aviation Administration in tatters.
8253	The Titans opted to sit their starting quarterback instead.
8254	The title is awarded to the contestant deemed to have made the best traditional porridge using just three ingredients; oatmeal, water and salt.
8255	The title of the stamps, printed in red and black, is centered on the top of the pane.
8256	The Toronto Star and Globe and Mail archives abound with stories of oil fever taking hold in Calgary in 1914 and again in 1926.
8257	The Tory document gives a vague promise of “safeguarding high standards of animal welfare” under a section on a post-Brexit deal for farming.
8258	“The total deal was for Rs 13 lakh and he had yet not taken Rs 5 lakh each for GICs but then he probably did not transfer the money at all and got fake certificates made but modus operandi is under probe,” said a police source.
8259	The total funding payable in 2018 to the parliamentary leaders of these parties amounted to €7.587m, while Independent TDs received a total of €703,704.
8260	The total proposed 2020 budget has a 5.59 per cent increase to property tax.
8261	The tougher Morrison talks, the harder it becomes to put his pledge into law.
8262	The town of Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer, with a population of 2,500, is the capital of the southern Camargue region, famed for its extensive wetlands, distinctive herds of wild white horses and cattle.
8263	The track hasn’t been made available on streaming structures as of but, but we blanketed an upload.
8264	The trade deadline comes and goes and we hear crickets.
8265	The trades and fansites weighed in but nothing was made official until earlier this week.
8266	The tragic news was conveyed by the Nigerians Citizens Association in South Africa (NICASA) in a letter sent by its president, Prince Ben Okoli to the Consular General, Nigerian Consulate in Johanesburg.
8267	The transportation company says it isn’t “seeing as severe a shortage as in previous years,” but it’s expecting to see some impact across the city.
8268	The Trenton City Commission welcomed the Tobacco Free Partnership program represented by Tracey DeCubellis, MS and Josh Akin.
8269	The trial will detail the eagerness of some in Trump's orbit to find damaging information to derail Clinton's presidential run.
8270	The tribunal further described the petition as a “futile and wasteful exercise.”
8271	The trio is restricted to a hotel room in Noida from where they are taken to their offices everyday to hand over documents.
8272	The Trojans’ sophomore starting quarterback threw for 215 yards and a touchdown before a right leg injury knocked him from the game and left him on the sidelines on crutches in the second half.
8273	The Trolley is adding a new route on Wednesday's only from 5:45 to 8:00 p.m. that will take those who need a lift to the United Way so they can take advantage of the service.
8274	The trouble is that Mullins tells anecdotes, not stories.
8275	The truck’s remaining momentum appears to swing the truck around so the rear impacts the roof of the house.
8276	The Trump administration is now attempting to cut off Maduro's funding streams, according to to National Security Adviser John Bolton.
8277	The truth is that I write the Question with Greg in my head.
8278	The truth is that the bill is not enabling any foreigner to come here.
8279	“The truth is, there is no such thing as sustainable building.
8280	“The truth is, we can do these things together,” Pedri said.
8281	The TSA reminds passengers that no individuals are permitted to bring weapons in their carry-on bag, including those with concealed weapons permit.
8282	The Turkish Defense Ministry said in a statement that the two sides discussed the latest situation in Syria during their meeting, including measures to ensure security in a demilitarized zone in Idlib despite provocations.
8283	The tutorial videos can be painfully slow and the player might be better off just diving in and learning how to build stages at their own pace, or at least checking out an online guide.
8284	The tweet described chairman of the House Intelligence Committee Rep. Adam Schiff (D-Calif.
8285	The twisted roots of the ancient tree separate the cafe’s seating area from a sprawling carpet shop next door.
8286	The two are known for their passion for animals and in a recent shot, they’re both in a group hug with an adorable dog in between them.
8287	The two biggest pieces of that backline also return from last season.
8288	The two firms will also monetise assets worth ₹37,500 crore in the next three years.
8289	“The two guys were ready to go for each other.
8290	The two injured were in critical condition, said Rachel Moreno, spokeswoman for the Harris County Fire Marshal’s Office.
8291	The two legislators passed away in June.
8292	The two main factors were incoming President Barack Obama and then-California Attorney General Jerry Brown’s new guidelines provided best practices for proving you were a legit medical marijuana entity in the event the state came calling.
8293	The two major parties will face demands to block the Adani coal mine and take concrete action on climate change in a combined statement by seven independent candidates that lists their conditions for support in the next Parliament.
8294	The two officers conducted 12 undercover operations in which they pretended to be customers and were able to purchase guns and ammunition.
8295	The two sides have only met once before and Wales ran out 54-9 winners that day at the 2015 World Cup.
8296	The two-state imposition defined Palestine’s fragmentation and eliminated all other options for Palestinians while allowing Israel to continue with its colonial expansion.
8297	The two teams will play a doubleheader on Sunday, April 28th set to begin at 1:08pm The doubleheader will be two seven inning games.
8298	The two women throw punches and pull each other's hair on the side of the highway as the driver behind them continues to record.
8299	The UK government said it will announce further details of the scheme in due course.
8300	The unemployment rate is forecast to remain steady atop of their 49-year low of +3.7% for a fourth consecutive month.
8301	The union representing Ontario’s public high school teachers will hold strike votes over the next month, saying talks with the provincial government are going nowhere.
8302	“The United States and the coalition overall has had tremendous success in eliminating leadership over the years in both Al-Qaeda and ISIS.
8303	The United States can play a crucial role in preventing such economic strife.
8304	The United States’ nonresponse to the Aramco attack, combined with U.S. President Donald Trump’s maximum pressure campaign, has increased the pressure on Riyadh to wrap up the proxy war in Yemen, the senior Trump administration official said.
8305	The University has also taken steps to reduce recurring expenditures.
8306	The university has said there will be two rounds of layoffs, the first at the end of November, and the second early next year.
8307	The University of Oregon, led by star Sabrina Ionescu, has a pretty good women’s basketball team.
8308	The unknown pickup driver hit Ervin and continued driving east without stopping, the report said.
8309	The unnamed 27-year-old was reportedly told by officials his behaviour was “not authentic” in a high-profile asylum case last year.
8310	The unoccupied Hudson River cruise ship broke loose from its moorings amid rising water and ice jams, floated slowly downriver and is jammed under a rail bridge.
8311	The U.N. said last week that more than 100,000 people in Burkino Faso have been displaced by violence, and the country’s education minister has said more than 150,000 children are not going to school because of the jihadist threat.
8312	The US had prepared for Wednesday's ruling and already drawn up lists of the dozens of goods it would put tariffs on.
8313	The US has held Iran responsible for the attack on Saudi's Aramco oil facilities that sparked a major rise in global oil prices despite Yemen's Houthi rebel group's claim stating that it was covering up for Iran.
8314	The U.S. House Intelligence Committee on Tuesday heard testimony from the former U.S. special envoy to Ukraine, Kurt Volker, and Tim Morrison, a former White House aide with the National Security.
8315	The US is quick to point out this as the main cause, forgetting that sanctions have prevented the country from re-negotiating its foreign debt, which has sucked in an increasing amount of the country’s foreign reserves.
8316	The US suffered a second mass killing just 14 hours after the El Paso attack when a gunman opened fire in a pub in Dayton, Ohio.
8317	The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Bennett’s favor in the case, Spears v. United States.
8318	The US will not reach the threshold of 1,250 resettlement offers it offered, and there is no other third-country option on the horizon despite years of searching.
8319	The Utah State Women’s basketball team took to the road last night for a Mountain West Conference matchup with the Wyoming Cowgirls.
8320	“The Vallabh Vidyalaya was affected by the wave of self-financed schools and migration to urban areas.
8321	The Vatican press office issued a communique Sept. 19 saying the council members met Sept. 17-19, and Pope Francis was present except when he had a scheduling conflict.
8322	The vehicle drove over the top of the tree, causing significant damage to the car's underside.
8323	The very first step, then, may be to perform a small slice of study.
8324	The veteran Labour MP Margaret Hodge described the decision to lift Williamson’s suspension as “appalling” and “outrageous”.
8325	The Via Toledo is not part of the Spaccanapoli.
8326	The Vice Chancellor of the University of Ibadan says the Premier University will not have anything to do with the cut-off mark JAMB announced.
8327	The victims’ families are especially unimpressed by the release of the police interview.
8328	The victim was given adrenaline and discharged the following day.
8329	“The victory means a lot to the participants.
8330	The video shows the teacher continuing her tirade for approximately a minute.
8331	The video was apparently shot on May 26, and it shows a UFO fleet flying in a triangular formation.
8332	The video which was from an interview with GHGossip, had Queen Farcadi talking about her craft excitedly in her local dialect.
8333	The Virat Kohli-led side has come into the tournament with great performances in the recent past.
8334	“The vision of this plan speaks to where Georgetown is today and what we intend to achieve,” Mentore told media operatives, during a press briefing on Tuesday.
8335	The visuals, beats, and the vibes in this particular song are just on another level.
8336	The voice-initiated application process is available as part of the recently launched Made at McDonald’s global hiring campaign.
8337	The voice said with a conspiratorial whisper “We can both succeed together in freeing ourselves from this unpleasant situation.
8338	The volunteers and staff at Hays Market will give shoppers a ticket listing the needed items they can select to be rung up by a cashier.
8339	The WA11's black anodized-aluminum chassis feels solid, and measuring just 6.1 by 3.3 by 1 inches, it's small enough to fit into a jacket pocket.
8340	The waffle about how "political speech" is an "absolute right within the league" will be repeated even as spectators are from games after expressing support for protesters in Hong Kong.
8341	The Wallabies scored six tries to two, but after some good passages of play in the first half, they struggled to sustain pressure and produce try-scoring opportunities until deep in the second half.
8342	The Wallabies were virtually unchanged and the All Blacks coach swung the axe.
8343	The Ward 4 councillor said standalone buildings are not the way to do business anymore.
8344	The warm dip is meant to raise awareness for the 2020 Polar Plunge campaign with a goal to increase participation and money raised.
8345	The Warriors won’t have much time to regroup.
8346	The Washington State Bar Association followed suit, becoming the first statewide bar association in the country, according to the American Civil Liberties Union, to formally oppose the increased presence of ICE agents at courthouses.
8347	The water-logging that began at about 8 am escalated till about 10.30 am, upsetting the morning peak hours.
8348	“The way that I look at things negatively impacting myself is how do I own them, and how do I then use them as strength to continue?” he says.
8349	The way the agreement was presented to selectmen, the deal only gives towns an advisory role, Schilling said.
8350	The way they frame that information – the words they use, the level of coverage and importance given to a story, the type of details that might be emphasised or omitted – influences how we think of it.
8351	“The way we go about this will impact how (the people) see our state," Walz told Forum News Service on Tuesday, April 2. “If we’re going to write our own story, let’s write one about how we got together and made it work."
8352	The weaker solar activity, known as Solar Minimum, also correlates with a global cooling trend.
8353	The weather draws many to explore the far corners of not only the United States, but also countries across the globe, as Airmen engage in worldwide operations.
8354	“The weather is out of your control,” Seaman continued.
8355	The weather service is anticipating an all-said-and-done total Friday of 2 to 4 inches for the Twin Cities and stretching into western Wisconsin.
8356	The website describes the hotel's 'calm and relaxing atmosphere' as one of its main attractions.
8357	The White House is directing Robert Mueller to not say very much in his upcoming congressional testimony.
8358	The wife of Dr Cox, Jordan began as quite an unlikable figure but soon mellowed as she was given more plotlines.
8359	The wing-back has enjoyed a rise to prominence at Wolfsburg since joining from Montpellier last season, and is a standout player on their left flank.
8360	The witness also said after the incident the accused father ran away.
8361	The witness also said the roof of the totalled vehicle was “crushed” with smashed in doors.
8362	The witness said within 45 seconds to a minute the car was fully on fire.
8363	The Wolverines haven’t earned a chance to play for the Big Ten title since division winners began playing in a championship game in 2011.
8364	The woman and her husband approached the Pant Nagar police station and got a case registered under sections 354 (D) (stalking) of the IPC and IT Act against the IB officer on November 10, following which he was arrested.
8365	The woman was left unconscious on the tracks after the accident as the underground train hurtled into the station in Buenos Aires.
8366	The women wear beautiful neckpieces handmade using beads.
8367	The worker is educated he or she has difficulty and so overpowering.
8368	The workers said that they are prepared to go the distance.”
8369	The working classes are taught that all men are equal and the ruling classes are taught that they're in the top 2%, so that's the main difference.
8370	The work never stops on the hunt for pic.
8371	The world number four improved his 2019 win-loss record to 59-17, including a Tour-leading 46 victories on hard courts this season.
8372	The world’s largest rainforest, 10 times the size of Texas, is often called the “lungs of the earth,” and 60 per cent of it lies within Brazil.
8373	The worsening of the military conflict "aggravates the poverty levels in the province, causing many young people to be caught up with violent movements, becoming a vicious cycle."
8374	The writer is the founding dean of Frederick S. Pardee School of Global Studies at Boston University.
8375	They added that the ban was short because “the actual newspaper article associated with the ‘Black Friday’ headline did portray an anti-racist message”.
8376	They adjusted the programme according to my situation and since I can speak Urdu and also know the regional culture, I became the host and introduced people to Pakistan.”
8377	They agreed that there are strong comparisons between the Lewis and the town of Ennis when it comes to promoting their shared Celtic cultures.
8378	They allegedly dragged the two into their black Mercedes Benz care.
8379	They all faced discrimination, exacerbated by Sax Rohmer’s 1913 novelThe Mystery of Fu Manchu, which painted a lurid picture of Chinese Limehouse as a hotbed of opium and crime.
8380	"They all said they were tired of hearing that this was against our culture (tikanga).
8381	They all taught us different things – the storytelling came from these three women in my life.
8382	They also contend, that despite descriptions of how the bug can be exploited, it can’t be triggered remotely.
8383	They also forcibly cut his hair and threatened him with scissors, which was also filmed by Donkoh.
8384	“They also insulted my late mother by mentioning her private parts.
8385	They also revealed that Formosa representatives have considered the possibility of removing remains if found on certain portions of the property because preserving them in place would be a “difficult option” for the company.
8386	They also said that they “hope you will continue to enjoy the app as usual on your Android phone.”
8387	“They always put on a great show.”
8388	“They are all youngsters and they are all fighting for the same position‚" he continued.
8389	They are a militant Islamist group that opposes the Somali government but has also carried out attacks throughout East Africa.
8390	They are being held in are Evin jail, where British mother Zaghari-Ratcliffe has been held on spying charges since 2016, according to the Times.
8391	They are doing so amicably and very slowly.
8392	They are Ex – Boarding Primary school and the new Mega Primary School, while Government Day Secondary School, Bama would equally be reopened.
8393	“They are expert at the use of time and delay until conditions have changed and leverage has been lost, to get a better outcome,” Daly said.
8394	They are manly and dominant!
8395	They are masters in analyzing the evidence available, even where there is almost none.
8396	They are meant to apply across tribal lines, to be “transpartisan.”
8397	"They are not poor enough to get government subsidies nor rich enough to get government tax credits.
8398	They are now planning to hold a big Christian wedding ceremony for their friends and family.
8399	They aren't any good at those.
8400	They are reflecting Africa and its diaspora in their kitchens, using techniques from places like Nigeria, Brazil, Morocco, Trinidad and Tobago, and ingredients like conch, berbere, fonio and cassava.
8401	They are releasing him.
8402	They are said to have both been born in San Francisco in 2000.
8403	They are taking their huge cash hoard and investing it conservatively and mostly wisely, but as an international player who drives the economy, those days are over.
8404	They are the result of a merger between two rivals, as Kristiansund FK and Clausenengen FK came together and agreed to establish a new professional side.
8405	They arrived separately but within minutes of each other.
8406	“They (Arsenal) are going backwards.
8407	"They asked us for guidance in writing to explain or to tell them what our position was, so we responded in writing," Barr told reporters in New York.
8408	They assaulted the homeowner, stole a number of things from the home and then fled.
8409	They avoided giving him the Purple Heart Medal.
8410	"They called to inform that my car was included, the repairs are worth Dh2,000."
8411	They came away with a huge win, 9-2.
8412	They can give you a cream to soothe the piles.’
8413	They come in different flavors and colors, but they’re men, and attraction is more than physical.
8414	They could not remain tireless forever.
8415	They covered my hotels, travel and most of my meals.
8416	They declared their second innings at 168/4, consolidating their first-innings lead of 299 runs.
8417	They did genuinely seem happy together, with Owen inviting Emma as his plus one to April and Matthew's wedding.
8418	They did not contest that Yovanovitch had been smeared by false allegations amplified by Giuliani or that those charges ultimately led to her ouster as ambassador to Ukraine.
8419	They died under "suspicious circumstances".
8420	They ditched the colour after the 1950 World Cup final defeat because, like Granny Fiver, they’re cranky and superstitious.
8421	They do not grow well in clay loam.
8422	They don’t know each other, 2 of them are strangers to me.
8423	"They don't want them attached to anyone, they don't want them speaking to anyone, they want to isolate them."
8424	The yellow metal has been consolidating over the last week or so in anticipation of the decision.
8425	The yellow weather warning for the south west of England is scheduled to be in place between 12pm today and 6pm tomorrow and will affect areas including Bath and North East Somerset, Cornwall, Devon and Somerset.
8426	They even sell them on EBay or so I am told.
8427	They excavated six feet and welcomed 10,000 earthworms, to the giddy delight of Jack, Ford and Buckley’s son, who turns seven in September.
8428	They fall and survive, only for Carl to destroy the Rev-9 and himself.
8429	They find support in chaotically like-minded five-piece act Holy Locust.
8430	They find these great rhymes.
8431	They fired laser-guided bombs and narrowly missed our military installations, the sources said, rejecting Khan’s remarks that the Pakistani jets did not target Indian defence bases.
8432	“They forget that they are the ones who stopped the promised referendum in the ceasefire agreement.
8433	"They fought for their country.
8434	They give the impression of having been painted with light, these glowing abstract forms and designs that appear futuristic and yet feel organic.
8435	They go short but Samoa are alive to the danger and eventually boom a clearing kick before Australia look to attack ball-in-hand from around halfway.
8436	They got a few more big plays and that’s the difference.”
8437	They got engaged when she was 16 and a year later they moved to London.
8438	They got inside.
8439	They got to show something to their shitstain followers how anti gay there are.
8440	They had good ratings.
8441	They had never met before.
8442	They had on flannel shirts.
8443	They had the fire under control about one hour later and there were no injuries to report.
8444	They had to rely on the ’ judgment and patriotism.
8445	They hate the idea of multiracial democracy,” Sanders writes.
8446	“They have all the rights,” Botti said of the treatment center.
8447	They have a roster of three people they can call upon, and, like any business owner, they know what they want and need in an employee.
8448	They have been bad for so long, I kinda want to see them turn it around.
8449	They have bench seats, like on regular commuter trains, but they'll get you from Ueno to the Narita terminal in about one hour for just 1,270 yen."
8450	They have built a sheet of nickel with nanoscale pores that make it as strong as titanium but four to five times lighter.
8451	They have more to hide (and to pay) and are much more likely to avoid paying taxes.
8452	They have not only failed the party but also the people of the state.
8453	“They have roots here,” Ragnhildur explains.
8454	They have water from the river Jordan in the sole.
8455	They invited me to sing one time, and after that, I started to go to rehearsals with them.
8456	They joined us this morning for CHCH Music Friday with their new single.
8457	They just beat us up and down the field”
8458	They just get to pay for it when they get paid.”
8459	They just tag along!
8460	“They know that China isn’t paying for tariffs.
8461	They live on feeding lies after lies to the public by distorting our true history.
8462	They'll make a perfect addition to any Halloween decorations you have planned this year.
8463	They'll say that speed limits are imposed mainly to generate revenue for municipalities and that most people can handle going as fast as their car will let them.
8464	They lost that day to Real Madrid, but this time the singing will continue long into the night here.
8465	“They love each other and it’s true they’ve been intimate over the years.
8466	“They made a decision that they were going to show up tonight.”
8467	They make meaning in radically different ways.
8468	They may have a sense of relief that they are out of a dangerous or unhealthy environment.
8469	They might even beat the accursed Patriots!
8470	They must eat a certain way.
8471	They must ensure markets remain competitive, innovative and open.
8472	They need a shoulder to lean on and someone that is always there to soothe them and tell them to keep fighting.
8473	They needed something more to get further, and they found it the acquisition of Leonard, the most valuable player of the 2014 finals, who was acquired from San Antonio and has carried the Raptors in this postseason.
8474	They noted that the one-day strategy meeting with stakeholders from impacted communities was designed to chart ways forward for the proper implementation of the UNEP report recommendations on the Ogoni clean-up.
8475	“they offer the first impression which you’re careless and usually would not have pride in your job,” Watson explained.
8476	They originate from materials manufactured for industrial and domestic use, such as Velcro or clothes detergent.
8477	The Young and the Restless spoilers say Ashley will certainly find reasons to come home and spend time with her family, so that’s nice to hear.
8478	The young English writer-director Alex Cox keeps them all speeding around – always on the periphery.
8479	The young mother who sold clothes had been living hand to mouth, her brother said.
8480	They possess a great attitude every day, which makes them truly coachable.
8481	“They rape men, they rape women; they do everything there.
8482	“They’re a bunch of cowards,” Giuliani said in response.
8483	“They’re all fighting for the abortion lobby vote and that could turn around and hurt them all in the general election,” she said.
8484	“They’re all going to run out of blocks and I’m going clean up,” John said.
8485	They really look up to him.”
8486	They recanted their confessions and there was no physical evidence linking them to the crime.
8487	They’re going to make their eventual purchase in-store, to the benefit of these shareholders.
8488	“They’re just pretty cool little animals,” he said.
8489	They’re only $4, meaning they’re low-risk if you end up killing them the next week.
8490	“They’re really just to look at.”
8491	They’re saying, ‘We don’t want the interest rate that is being determined in the market.
8492	They’re so good in the half court, so big and they shoot it so well.
8493	They returned home after 31 days.
8494	They’re using it on one of their midcard programs (Tony Nese vs. Noam Dar), which aren’t names that will move the dial for casual fans.
8495	They said Mr. Betts arrived in the entertainment district Saturday evening with his sister and another “companion.”
8496	They said the counsel is capable of destabilizing the nation’s economy.
8497	They said there was an incident and she kicked somebody and she's being charged and she's on her way," Kirkland recalled.
8498	They said there were measures in place that government could use to deal with children in conflict with the law such as pre-trial diversion, which is at the disposal of the State.
8499	They say, ‘it doesn’t affect me, just those Black and brown people, so it doesn’t matter.’
8500	They say there was an instant attraction and fell in love.
8501	They say they don’t believe there is a threat to the public.
8502	They say they’ll accept nothing less than the end of the government of prime minister —and an entirely new political system.
8503	They scored two to New York’s one to hold the lead entering the middle period.
8504	They see increasing tension between Israel and the United States.
8505	They see it as a slap in the face as well as the final straw in their trust and confidence that their employer is really committed to sorting out nursing pay, terms and conditions.
8506	They separately analysed the stem, peel, flesh, seeds and calyx – the straggly bit at the bottom where the flower used to be.
8507	They set a buy rating and a $6.50 target price on the stock.
8508	They set an outperform rating and a $28.00 price objective on the stock.
8509	They settled in New York in 1985 and their daughter Lolita was born in 1988.
8510	They share son Hendrix and daughter Heaven.
8511	They show up and do what they’re supposed to do.
8512	They split at the beginning but bump into each other throughout the course of the game.
8513	They stand shoulder to shoulder with Muslims from around the world, all considered equal in Islam before God, seeking mercy, blessings, good health, bounty and healing.
8514	They talked to a farmer who told them to bend down and feel the soil.
8515	“They (the Centre) will thrust Hindi and ease out Tamil even if we so much as snooze”.
8516	“They think stuff happens separate from each other, when in reality, crises especially happen simultaneously through communication or when you’re on the brink of war.”
8517	They thought, and one of them even said after the meeting, that they ‘really stuck it Pollard.’
8518	They thought they had free reign to take over Bings.
8519	They travelled by foot and sometimes public transport.
8520	They tried to block the road by performing "poojas" (Hindu rituals) to block the procession on Sunday.
8521	They've been embracing this new effort by Israeli settlers in the West Bank to advance joint business ventures with Palestinian businessmen.
8522	They’ve got about $60 million in projected space, and is the largest cap commitment in 2020 at $17.7 million.
8523	"They've never smelled this.
8524	They’ve played hard and they kept believing.
8525	They’ve pointed to Franklin Delano Roosevelt as an example of a president who pushed past setbacks to help ordinary Americans.
8526	They walk him into the boardroom and it’s just everybody in suits.
8527	They wanted lads to run around for 90 minutes and get in a scrap.
8528	They want their "ancestral land" back.
8529	They warned of an increasingly diverse range of security dangers around the globe, from North Korean nuclear weapons to Chinese cyberespionage to Russian campaigns to undermine Western democracies.
8530	They went 0-10 with runners in scoring position in Game 3, the first team to go hitless in that many at-bats in the World Series since 2008. went 0-for-4 with a strikeout on his 21st birthday, while only has two hits in 13 at-bats this series.
8531	They went to West Palm Beach.
8532	“They were able to source the drugs from particular places — in this case from Brazil but from places like China as well.
8533	They were all really loved but one of my favourite things to do is to bring things back to life.
8534	They were also found not guilty for trying to wire him a further £1,500 to pay a people smuggler to try to get him out.
8535	They were/are all radicals, born to Jewish parents, had no Jewish identity and hurt Jews (not to mention non-Jews).”
8536	“They were chasing him and they ran him into that area and gunshots erupted,” Brown said.
8537	They were cutting more than nails at this establishment.
8538	They were immediately taken to a vet, where action was taken quickly to restore their health.
8539	They were pinned down right on the water’s edge by an inhuman wall of fire from the bluff.
8540	They were taken to hospital and will be formally arrested after treatment," said a police officer.
8541	They were the first class to participate in what has become an annual tradition of volunteering, said Ms. Chauvin.
8542	They where all praying loud crying, and putting force on me praying the Gay Away.
8543	They will also need to have their application approved before the winner is selected at random.
8544	They will now face Championship Queen of the South in the last 16.
8545	They will now operate in East Asian and Southeast Asian markets.
8546	They will surely miss him.
8547	They won the only other match they have played at Dharamsala‚ piling up 200/3 in reply to India’s 199/5 in a T20 there in October 2015.
8548	They won’t impact the 2019 financial year results.
8549	They work intellectually and analytically, qualities and skills which will complement other existing corporate directors.
8550	They would become the fourth permanent host of the awards, after Eamonn Holmes, who fronted the first show back in 1995, and Sir Trevor McDonald, who did the honours for 13 years between 1996 and 2008.
8551	'They would cry sometimes, alone'
8552	“They wouldn’t be happy in a pie factory…as head tasters.”
8553	The Zimbabwe Energy Regulatory Authority has announced the reduction of Mandatory Ethanol Blending from 20% to 10% with immediate effect.
8554	The Zim dollar lurched from Z$8:US$1 a few months ago to nearly 30:1, but has since clawed its way back to 15:1 as the reserve bank embarked on a mop up operation to reclaim the billions of dollars flooded into the economy in recent months.
8555	The zombies combine their cosmic powers to take down Galactus, then proceed to feast on the gigantic cosmic villain.
8556	Things are changing, but I think in order to be more inclusive to a diverse audience, climbers should think about when they are naming things and saying things, how that appears to someone who is nonwhite,” Thompson says.
8557	“Things are worrisome in rural areas,” Ziliak said in a recent interview with The Philadelphia Inquirer.
8558	Things got so bad that Gomez felt the need to hop on her Instagram live and urge fans to be kind.
8559	Things like shampoo, conditioner, shower gel, toothpaste and sun cream can all be purchased in resort, or your hotel should provide them.
8560	Things were only complicated by Dane's attraction to the Inhuman, Crystal.
8561	Things were so different when Aidan was young.
8562	Think of the situation ABC presenter Leigh Sales found herself in at a recent black-tie fundraiser, when retired businessman Phil Newman offered his cheek to her, before turning his head and kissing her on the lips.
8563	Think the fans have been given what they wanted.
8564	Third Annual Have a Beer for a Bighorn.
8565	Third, building on the success of the U.S.-India nuclear agreementU.
8566	• Third, there may also be questions focusing on the identity of people in the Intelligence Community.
8567	This 2001 Aggie team had an all-around fantastic year.
8568	This allowed them to flourish under self-rule, while just to the north Turkey’s 12 million Kurds aspired to the same sort of freedom.
8569	This all stems from an investigation by the state Auditor’s Office that started more than a year ago.
8570	This appeal is hereby dismissed”, Justice Muhammad held.
8571	“This app gave me a chance to try a totally different style from my normal life.”
8572	'This area is also extremely vulnerable to flooding, especially with the changes from climate change.
8573	This arrives after fans saw a Starbucks-style disposable hot drink holder lurking onscreen during a feast scene at the beginning of episode 4 of the HBO show's the eighth and final season.
8574	This “both sides support peace” becomes a tool to eliminate any meaningful discussion or criticism of the issue because they don’t want to confront the contradictory definitions of peace that exist.
8575	This brings the budget reduction for the Calgary Fire Department to a total of $9 million for 2019."
8576	This built to a striking and exciting controlled cacophony.
8577	This can be determined by numbers.
8578	This can be tricky: Your DJ or band has limited time to play all the songs previously requested, so adding in extras could get in the way.
8579	This CBD-only topical lotion is blended with ginseng, hawthorn, and willow bark, natural compounds that are supposed to help aid in muscle recovery.
8580	This change won't be implemented in NCAA DII until 2020-2021.
8581	“This (channelisation) was long awarded.
8582	This club is all about service before self.”
8583	This comes in the form of the Minecraft Bedrock Edition which Microsoft is finally rolling out to the PS4.
8584	‘This community inspires me so much.
8585	“This comprehensive process, which resulted in the creation of the Ohio Legal Help website, has ensured that Ohio Legal Help will meet the diverse needs of potential users.”
8586	This conventional street sweeper uses jets underneath it to spray water onto the road surface to loosen particles and reduce airborne dust.
8587	This could be either due to companies making losses in FY19 or accumulated losses from previous years, setting off the year’s profits.
8588	This, coupled with the worrying trend of young people being attracted to vaping, raises fears of another generation suffering from chronic lung disease’
8589	This cracker of a deal is even better than the $100 day-one discount previously offered by Best Buy.
8590	This cute little ceramic dog was one of the silent auction items donated for last year's Macaws for Paws celebration.
8591	This dark Islamic strategy is so much bigger than the average person realizes.
8592	“This debate matters in particular because people don’t start paying attention until after Labor Day,” Ms. Fudge said.
8593	This decision by Nestle is in line with our view that lower-tier cities (which house the majority of China's infant population) will become a figurative battleground for IMF (infant milk formula) brands."
8594	This development has attracted a number of regional and international cricket events including Under 17 and Under 19 cricket tournaments as well as games featuring the West Indies Women’s Cricket Team.
8595	This development is an underappreciated cause of the mounting tensions in Nancy Pelosi’s caucus.
8596	This doesn’t even account for the abuse Jewish Labour members received online, nor how Jewish members came to be excluded from party activities.
8597	This donorship is measured in terms of amount of donors, not amount of dollars, so Give2Pepp seeks to educate students about the importance of giving back.
8598	This downplaying of the original’s sexualized content also includes turning the harem girls seen in the "One Jump Ahead" and "Prince Ali" numbers to schoolgirls.
8599	This downward trend also shows in the number of visitors.
8600	This ended the Bruin pitching staff’s 37-inning streak without an earned run allowed to start the season.
8601	This engagement across communities invited individuals from different socioeconomic and racial backgrounds to come together over a common issue — the need for accessible health care.
8602	This event sells out every week.
8603	This event started with a group of friends pitching tents (hehe) and enjoying the afternoon in the park.
8604	“This feels like a really creative collaboration.
8605	This fundraising event is one of several planned for the academic year to reach their goal of $40,000.
8606	“This gesture is intended to be a confirmation of the journey that our churches have made in drawing closer to one another: a journey at times demanding and difficult, yet one accompanied by evident signs of God’s grace,” he wrote.
8607	This gives farmers and ranchers a chance to try something new while they deal with that risk.”
8608	'This goal kick should not be allowed under the laws of the game.
8609	This guy's a major asshole.
8610	“This has not been Europe’s finest hour,” EU Commissioner for Migration, Home Affairs and Citizenship, Dimitris Avramopoulos said of the Sea Watch debacle last week.
8611	This holiday the event occurred December 15, however you may still support online by giving a simple donation or register for the next event on January 19.
8612	This ICC is meant for all kinds of Vehicles wherein the construction work is undergoing in full swing by JKPCC and the same is expected to become fully functional by the end of this year.
8613	This includes going back into the basement.
8614	This intensive program provided a year of much silence, prayer, reflection and self-examination in preparation for first vows.
8615	This is a consistent issue throughout each episode.
8616	This is a help to the dialogue that will happen between the Holy Father and his advisors with the New York bishops.
8617	This is aided no end by a superb visual feast, especially on and higher-end PCs.
8618	“This is all we have left, so we aren’t going to move,” said veteran activist Walter Ritte, who was one of the kūpuna arrested.
8619	This is all wrapped up in a 3,490-pound package.
8620	“This is a major pro-life victory and we thank President Trump for taking decisive action.
8621	This is a misuse of presidential tariff authority and counter to congressional intent," Senate Financial Services Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley said in a statement.
8622	This is an attempt to overthrow a legitimately elected government.
8623	“This is an investment in various sectors of South Sudan including education, agriculture, health, transport and tourism.”
8624	This is another species described in 2007, and was named after the late Amith Munindradasa.
8625	“This is a once in 26 year opportunity.
8626	This is a partially sourced, partially in-house distilled and aged straight bourbon, blended and packaged in a lovely, rounded bottle that evokes French cognac and certain scotch brands such as Glenmorangie.
8627	This is a significant challenge to Facebook and Google and will deepen awareness of Apple’s position on privacy.
8628	This is a sports car.
8629	This is a summary of current recommendations and price targets for Baker Hughes and its competitors, as reported by MarketBeat.
8630	“This is a team that’s closed out games for years,” Cassidy added.
8631	“This is a tradition from the Ottoman Empire,” he said.
8632	This is a transfer from his current assignment as parochial vicar of the Church of All Saints in Lakeville.
8633	“This is a very exciting time for the Falklands, with several key developments to our infrastructure being progressed, and it’s good to be part of helping deliver the programme.
8634	This is a very important thing to notice in the present age of social media.
8635	“This is a world first.
8636	“This is a wrong world,” he said, after a five-second time penalty deprived him of the win and instead handed Hamilton a record-equalling seventh triumph here in Montreal.
8637	"This is because none of the interventions of government to help streamline the operations and activities of the State entities have had the intended impact.
8638	This is despite objections from many groups, including Chinese educationist group Dong Zong and, more recently, Seni Khat Action Team or Sekat, a coalition of 24 groups.
8639	This is everything you need to know about e-girls.
8640	“This is fantastic and very hot which is what we want in Europe.
8641	This is further expected to provide the North America Contract Logistics market players to cope up with the rapidly transforming automotive industry.
8642	This is how mostly we have been able to reach hundreds of people and help them cure their ulcer totally.
8643	This is important because we would like to be in a position where we isolate critical organisations like hospitals so that they have solar power.
8644	"This is in fact, the first time I've ever done one of these, and that's because I have a very, very strict policy because of my job.
8645	This is ITV's biggest overnight audience so far this year.
8646	This is just the greatest performance I’d ever seen.
8647	"This is likely to be a protracted incident that will be ongoing for a number of days," Mr Stephens said.
8648	“This is not workers’ money.
8649	This is now seen as prophetic, but at the time, Dr. Broecker was an outlier.
8650	This isn't an optical illusion for me at all.
8651	This is on the twelfth house of First, or a gab on a scripplecority with it wild, are on the family personal resounational, engage for unwinds and truth you’re crdinger about it.
8652	This is precisely why even middle-class Hindus are susceptible to political campaigns built around stories about the persecution of Hindus by Muslim rulers.
8653	This is primarily due to the fact that we have a highly engaged audience through this medium, something other mediums fail to deliver,” he added.
8654	This is said to be "organic" which means it changes not only over time, but also reacts to the way you type.
8655	This is the 13th meeting all-time between WSU and ORU.
8656	This is the basis of a once politically docile people not only condemning President Weah but also predicting an early collapse of his government.
8657	This is the most direct metaphor of the term “awakening” for the spiritual path.
8658	This is too important to ignore…78% of the county’s population would be affected in a positive way if we changed it.”
8659	This is unacceptable,” Rodricks says.
8660	This is useful if you want to hide where you've been or what you've searched for (for whatever reason, we aren't judging), but an interesting implementation is keeping your personalised information out of any use.
8661	This is where our energies in this negotiation must be focused.
8662	“This is your digital monument.”
8663	This just seems opportunistic and not intentional.
8664	This lady has put in her paces.
8665	“This land was allotted by the Delhi Development Authority without consulting the government.
8666	“This list was prepared bureaucratically and it is high time to understand that this type of work is not possible to complete in a bureaucratic way,” he added.
8667	This may partially explain the increasing prevalence of allergies in the Western world, as birth rates have declined.
8668	This means Ireland will be receiving very different weather from the rest of Europe.
8669	This memorable moment was late to arrive, coming on the penultimate point of the match.
8670	This new mods page just another great feature from Hunt and DestinySets.
8671	This news release contains forward-looking information, which involves known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause actual events to differ materially from current expectation.
8672	This one has more of a Christmassy theme to it if you want something more traditional but with a slight bit of nerdy goodness too.
8673	This one has seen several delays, making many wonder just how good it will be, but it seems we'll finally find out in June.
8674	This past week, the 40Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) met in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, to discuss a region that is not only facing geo-political headwinds, but also a return of mass movement protests happening from Lebanon to Iraq.
8675	This pattern by age is evident among both Democrats and Republicans.
8676	“This perspective yields interesting results.
8677	“This poor financial position has been seen before.
8678	This process both stimulated and was fueled by the unrestrained growth of individual wants.
8679	This process is costly and can take five to eight years, enough time to gather information about efficacy and potential adverse effects.
8680	“This program is designed to meet that desire on a rigorous but workable timeline for the student who wants to excel in the job market, expand their research capabilities or even further pursue a PhD,” Besterfield-Sacre said.
8681	This 'proof' is as ridiculous as Colin Powell using cartoon drawings and a vial of talcum powder to justify destroying Iraq.
8682	This proves NE didn’t do anything different other than give a middle finger to the Jets from the sideline location.
8683	This Question page on EmpowHER Women's Health works best with javascript enabled in your browser.
8684	This report makes clear: Donald Trump is looking out for himself, not for America.
8685	This report studies the global market size of Starch in key regions like North America, Europe, Asia Pacific, Central & South America and Middle East & Africa, focuses on the consumption of Starch in these regions.
8686	This represents a $0.36 annualized dividend and a yield of 1.35%.
8687	This represents a $1.50 dividend on an annualized basis and a dividend yield of 1.61%.
8688	This represents a $2.14 annualized dividend and a dividend yield of 3.07%.
8689	This represents a dividend yield of 1.41%.
8690	This represents a yield of 0.3%.
8691	This Schweizer SGS 2-33 Glider is a two-seat, high-wing, strut-based glider and is used for training by Benz Aviation at the Ionia County Airport.
8692	This seems like standard practice, except for one thing- the Lakers had no idea it was going on.
8693	This seems to have become a common way for scamsters to steal money from unwitting customers.
8694	This seems viable over expanding the number of platforms at the Visakhapatnam station.
8695	This segment supplies its solutions for use in mobile devices, including smartphones, notebook computers, wearables, tablets, and cellular-based applications for the Internet of Things (IoT).
8696	This set up will be in place until the construction has been completed by the end of March.
8697	"This should have been made clearly illegal more than a year ago, and then we would've been able to charge people for renting their place illegally."
8698	This site is not endorsed by, sponsored by, or affiliated with the University of Texas.
8699	This smart soap has the potential to outlast its established network counterparts as long as it is afforded the same unconditional love.
8700	This story has been shared 5,756 times.
8701	This strategic corridor carries one of the highest volumes of traffic in the KwaZulu-Natal and Free State network.
8702	This strategy was especially helpful when Complex Music tweeted that Drake gave two McDonald’s employees a $10,000 tip.
8703	This study found that compared with nonusers, e-cigarette users were 56 percent more likely to have a heart attack and 30 percent more likely to suffer a stroke.
8704	This study is the first trial to evaluate pembrolizumab in advanced lung cancer, and they provide the longest efficacy/safety follow-up for NSCLC patients treated with the drug.
8705	This Sunday, Nov. 3, marks the end of daylight saving time in Colorado.
8706	“This support from Washington Regional will help us meet the needs of both prospective students seeking to pursue this occupational path and the community by training more nursing professionals for our growing region.”
8707	This table compares Evergy and its peers’ net margins, return on equity and return on assets.
8708	This thin, noodle-like pastry is soaked with sugar syrup and layered with mildly salty cream cheese, making an interesting play of contrasting flavours and textures.
8709	This Thursday, the Indianapolis Colts (6-4) will play the Houston Texans (6-4) in a marquee matchup that will help to decide the AFC South division leader.
8710	This too is something we are all too familiar with after thirty years of dictatorship and the ideological fanaticism that anchors it.
8711	This track features repetitive, high-energy production from Jay Mitta and vocals from Dogo Janja that are by far the most aggressive to be seen on Nyege Nyege to date.
8712	This type of talk sometimes gets drowned out by more inflammatory kinds of political rhetoric, which tend to attract more attention for their bombast, but Tombe believes it's important to hear.
8713	This unfortunate incident took place Jan.
8714	This untreated salt water can’t just hang around in ponds—or, in worst-case scenarios, go into oceans or sewers.
8715	"This was a fast-moving fire that started on I-80 and the toll plaza, the fire jumped I-80 and it burned on both sides in south Vallejo," said Brown.
8716	This was after Dr Kambwili’s lawyers informed the Commission that their client was unable to attend the questioning as he was unwell nursing a bout of Malaria.
8717	“This was a game where you’re going in and they’re dangerous, but they’re 0-5 in conference, so it’s like you have nothing to gain – you’re supposed to win on paper,” Sealy said.
8718	This was a lie.
8719	This was a weekly change of -8,819 net contracts from the previous week which had a total of -26,287 net contracts.
8720	This was before any rockets had been fired.
8721	This was not the first time a central bank official has warned against the rising bad debts due to Mudra loans.
8722	This was one of the decisions arrived today at the weekly state Executive Council meeting held at the Benue Peoples House, Makurdi, and presided over by the Acting Governor, Engr Benson Abounu.
8723	'This was performed by my colleague, Miss Sonja Cerovac.'
8724	This was revealed recently during a poultry and egg information day of the Poultry Production Association in Windhoek where international and local speakers informed attendants about the strategies of moving towards independence.
8725	This was the largest ground force contingent that China has ever sent beyond its borders, giving the PLAGF valuable exposure to Russian modern large-scale combined-arms operations, skills that are now a top priority for the PLA.
8726	“This weekend we travel to Ignacio to take them on Friday at 6 p.m.,” Mergelman said.
8727	"This week has been hugely exciting and hugely important for us as a group," said former Scarlets coach Pivac.
8728	This week has seen three releases from some of the city’s top chefs, and more are coming.
8729	This week I had FIVE very powerful possibilities …
8730	This week's primary expectation did not play out as lower price discovery developed only to 62.61s within key demand.
8731	This went on for a couple of years, until I met the casting director for Dancing With the Stars.
8732	This wide-field image shows the surroundings of the young star HR8799 in the constellation of Pegasus.
8733	This will be Nebraska’s first road game at Maryland, and now the Cornhuskers have played in every Big Ten stadium.
8734	This will create some anticipation before the big reveal of your telephonic request.
8735	This will give control and choice to people diagnosed with dementia and their families, supported by a team of professionals.
8736	This will likely be appealing for busy adults who don't spend enough time playing to justify buying a console, and for youngsters who would likely play from their smartphones.
8737	“This win is proof that change is always within our reach, on gerrymandering, voting rights, and much more.”
8738	This would make their child more suited as an underdog protagonist than Boruto who seems to have everything going for him.
8739	This year hasn’t proved much better.
8740	This year he was named Civic Volunteerism Chair on the PEAK Advisory Board.
8741	This year, however, UK universities are benefitting particularly from tensions between China and the US, which has meant Chinese students are increasingly looking for destinations other than the US for their studies.
8742	This year, make an effort to applaud small wins and say thank you.
8743	This year, Michigan unions have reported at least $20 million less in revenue than they did in 2012.
8744	This years was no different, as each pew in the Urban Grace Church was filled with jubilant audience members.
8745	This year, we had the third addition of this family: Yujin.
8746	This year, when she was failing an online course, he called her several times a day.
8747	This year – which marks the 20th anniversary of the DJSI – which has had a record corporate interest in the SAM CSA, reflects the enduring relevance of the DJSI for measuring and advancing ESG practicesManjit Jus, Head of ESG Ratings, RobecoSAM.
8748	Thomaidis was pleased with how Canada responded in the tournament.
8749	Thomas has converted receptions on 83.6 percent of passes thrown his way this year.
8750	Thomas Jervis, a lawyer at law firm Leigh Day, which represented the residents in the civil claim against Whirlpool, said: ‘My clients have been through hell and back.
8751	Thomas should look at the Cowboys and know that they’d very likely hold onto him longer than any other team.
8752	Thomaston Fire Chief Mikial Mazzeo will discuss some of the fire safety challenges of historic homes on Thursday, October 17, at 7 p.m. in Watts Hall, 174 Main Street, Thomaston.
8753	Thompson said the bureau was “lucky,” however, because the bar codes on the envelopes were correct.
8754	Those aren't on sale yet, but they will be soon, no question.
8755	Those characters can easily become the heroes of the story with little effort because the fans want it.
8756	Those considered frontrunners in the race are Nabil Karoui of the Nidaa Tounes Party, Abdelfattah Mourou of the Ennahda Party, and Abdelkarim Zbidi, the defense minister, who is running as an independent.
8757	Those deaths are counted one at a time, and the media looks the other way.
8758	Those disclosures and enlistment delays have forced several to apply for U.S. asylum protection, including Li, while he fights the Army's determination that he is unsuitable for service.
8759	Those hands better be cupped and don’t even think about speaking without first being spoken to.
8760	Those interested can become members the day of the event.
8761	Those MCO’s, once they get the money, can sit on it for who knows how long.”
8762	Those tunnels are cooled in the summer, along with most academic buildings, but many dorms are not.
8763	“Those who criticise the action are called evil but they are not evil as they know what they are doing and saying, and they love Nigeria and Nigerians not less than the likes of Osinbajo.
8764	Those who loved the show have been heading to theaters dressed in period costumes to match what they are witnessing on the screen.
8765	Though he supports all kinds of country artists, Mary says, the singer foresees country music taking a turn back toward the traditional in the immediate future.
8766	Though McIntosh speaks with an emphatic fondness for Russia, cycling across the country he encountered numerous challenges — not least his bike being stolen.
8767	Though race and ethnicity data in the census are rarely tied directly to federal funding, local organizations say that if the data were available, it could help them raise money from other sources and draw publicity for their work.
8768	Though Scholz still officially toes the line of the “black zero” policy, a majority in his party have no problem with increased spending, especially as there are no laws that require the federal budget be balanced.
8769	Though that last option is included as a basis for comparison,TVA said.
8770	Thousands of young adults from Cache Valley gather in the Spectrum for a devotional with Elder Jeffrey R. Holland.
8771	Three candidates – Garry McCarthy, Neal Sales-Griffin and John Kozlar – did not respond to multiple requests for their responses.
8772	Three engineers who volunteered to drain millions of gallons of water from tanks beneath the burning reactor in the days immediately after the explosion waded through highly radioactive water and debris to reach the release valves.
8773	Three knee injuries, an arrest and the death of his mother made 2018 a monumental struggle for Shannon Brooks.
8774	Three of the paintings in the series depict scenes of crowded boats, bursting with desperate migrants crossing the Mediterranean in search of a better and safer life.
8775	Three research analysts have rated the stock with a sell rating, one has given a hold rating and two have given a buy rating to the company’s stock.
8776	Through 2018, there had never been a $500 billion trade deficit with China.
8777	Through it all, Booke will never give up.
8778	Through its subsidiaries, it is engaged in the investment banking business.
8779	Throughout history, many inventions have captured the attention of the world.
8780	“Throughout our more than 30 years in business, we’ve been fortunate enough to have attracted so many talented, like-minded individuals and feel truly honored that our employees would classify us as a Top Mortgage Workplace.”
8781	Throughout the event music from the Harry Potter movies will be played over the public address system.
8782	Through their phone’s camera, SnapChat users can now paint in 3D space.
8783	Through the Soldiers’ Angels Treats for Troops Halloween Candy drive, businesses can register to serve as a collection site for this program.
8784	Throwing up, drowsy, terrible colds and in a rush to finish it so I can start doing music videos before I started showing.
8785	Thursday's 18th stage is a 208-kilometre mountain trek between Embrun and Valloire featuring three climbs above 2000 metres.
8786	Thus a 22-minute run by Edwards against the Knicks.
8787	Thus, increasing the number of kids playing tennis could be a hit and a slam not only for American tennis but for society in general.
8788	Thus, it will be wrong of the commission to rely on the mere speculative letter of the appellants’ counsel at this stage when elections have already been concluded and winners have emerged.
8789	Tiananmen 1989: Lessons for TodayChina Has a Head Start in the New Space RaceIndia's BIMSTEC GambitHas the Paint Dried on Malaysia’s Protest Art?
8790	Tickets are available at the Abington Community Library; library cardholders pay $35 and non-library cardholders pay $40.
8791	Tickets were available in packages that included VIP parking, limited table service and various table reservations.
8792	TIFF will announce other winners including the Oscar-race predictive People’s Choice Award, on Sunday.
8793	Tight end C.J. Hockenson and safety are also active after being listed as questionable.
8794	Tips are for those that give good service.
8795	Tip: Try turkey bacon that's lower in calories and fat.
8796	Tis I, your humble author, in a photo I’ve waited almost 40 years to take.
8797	TNPSC Group 4 answer key:Tamil Nadu Public Service Commission (TNPSC) has released the tentative answer key for the recruitment exam held to hire group 4 services including combined civil services examination.
8798	To accomplish that, Mercy plans to hire some of the CNR faculty members and possibly to lease former CNR classrooms.
8799	To achieve this, the cabinet is set to consider a financial engineering mechanism.
8800	To a question on China and claims of border incursions, he said it was due to differing perceptions of the Line of Actual Control.
8801	To a question on who would be accommodated in the new state cabinet, he said it was the prerogative of the chief minister, who would take a call in this regard after the oath-taking ceremony.
8802	“To be honest, the people criticising me for it are probably people who have never kicked a ball in their lives who are sitting in the house being keyboard warriors, but I’m doing a job I love and it’s a celebration at the end of the day.
8803	To cast further light on the thinking that goes into the group’s repertoire choices, VoXX will offer pre-concert talks designed to expand upon the program notes.
8804	To check your registration status, SMS your ID number to 32810 or call the IEC’s contact centre on 0800 11 800.
8805	To compound the problem, camping 'below the dam' is closed as well due to a bridge that you would have to 'General Lee across' in order to get to the campground portion.
8806	To date, the registry has recruited over 30,000 donors in 31 countries across four continents, identified over 9,000 patients, and facilitated 33 bone marrow transplants.
8807	"Today, a fifth of the world's electricity is produced by renewable energy.
8808	Today, change is ignored and new technology is blasé.
8809	Today, Dr. Oz investigates if supermarkets are overcharging you for beef cuts.
8810	Today during Star Wars: Celebration, ILMxLAB announced that SNL alum Maya Rudolph has joined the cast of Vader Immortal: A Star Wars VR Series.
8811	Today, hundreds of millions of people worldwide use Mozilla Firefox to experience the Web on computers, tablets and mobile devices.
8812	Today I love being up before the sun and greeting the day in its infancy, getting to watch it grow up, pass the childhood of its wee small hours and mature into the youth of its morning.
8813	Today in the U.S., no matter what kind of household you are living in, there are probably millions of other people living in a household like yours.
8814	"Today is a day of rebirth," Williams said.
8815	Today is a multi-platform news and information media company.
8816	Today, it is still Brown’s future we’re waiting to hear about, not Taylor’s.
8817	Today it remains as UNFPA-WCAROs centerpiece of intervention in leveraging on the youthful demographic dividend in the region.
8818	Today, it serves over 110 million customers across the world with more than 7,000 branches and employs around 70,000 people,” Mehta said.
8819	Today, July 29, Hluhoveria filed a resignation report that was immediately granted.
8820	Today, men across the world will ditch their razors for a month, all in the name of raising awareness – and money – for men’s health issues.
8821	Today, she found some homegrown tomatoes, mushrooms, and onions, which will be roasted in the oven.
8822	Today, the BCO’s members mirror the city’s growing tribe of young musicians from diverse social, religious and economic backgrounds training in western classical music.
8823	“Today, the day before Thanksgiving, our owner Duncan McIntosh Company has decided to shut us down,” the OC Weekly tweeted Wednesday.
8824	Today, the higher a person climbs on the org chart, the harder she is expected to work.
8825	Today, the Institute receives the majority of its money from the National Science Foundation (NSF), along with a variety of private donors.
8826	Today, the singer, songwriter, rapper known as Thutmose released his second single from his upcoming EP.
8827	Today, those gathered inTaumarunui are celebrating the first step, as the two voices of the river begin meeting with the communities along it to build a strategy that addresses the body of water as an indivisible whole.
8828	Today, Vivekananda is the modern face of Hinduism, that acknowledges and honors all traditions and world religions, encourages scientific inquiry, and stands for the unity of all existence.
8829	Today, when asked if Labour now supported a second referendum in all circumstances, Mr Corbyn said: "What we are saying is, No Deal we oppose and we think people should have a final choice on it.
8830	To define who can add you to a group go to Settings > Account > Privacy > Groups.
8831	To demand the answers, I believe we might need to turn to campus and its leaders who keep saying they support equity and inclusion.
8832	To donate online, visit www.wisdomspring.org/donate/. For more information, contact Hough at 703-505-5152 or visit lbhswalkingforwater.
8833	Todoroki and Bakugo seem like they may as well be polar opposites.
8834	To do so, the website offers all kinds of support to help you raise funds in November.
8835	To enjoy a dinner with her guidance and wit became the metaphor for this interview.
8836	To ensure that the Ada app could be used and understood by both medical professionals and patients alike crucial collaboration with local partners and experts is required.
8837	To facilitate those projects, one of the north driveways into the park will be closed, along with some parking.
8838	To find sexual violence resources, call Loyola’s Sexual Assault Advocacy Line at 773-494-3810.
8839	To find the dripline for the target elements, the researchers focused beams of calcium-48 ions at beryllium atoms, resulting in fragmentation and the creation of small nuclei.
8840	To form the government, a parliament member has to gather the support of at least 61 members of the 120-member Knesset.
8841	To get a better idea of who was attending and what their interests are, we distributed questionnaires.
8842	Together, Barr’s four rules make an obstruction of justice case impossible.
8843	“Together, we must honour the unanimous commitments made to reduce drug abuse, illicit trafficking and the harm that drugs cause, and to ensure that our approach promotes equality, human rights, sustainable development, and greater peace and security.”
8844	“Together with a team of seven people, consisting of me and my assistants, we did this work.
8845	Together with other recent transactions, the implied value of the Luminex-BHP deal highlights the demand and the relatively high valuations realisable for quality projects in this region, even at a relatively early stage of appraisal.
8846	To help, Meyer said, the $1.5 million limit under the California FAIR Plan should be raised to $2.5 million.
8847	"Tokyo 2020 is a must; Ghanaians are expecting nothing short of qualification and we cannot afford to fail them.
8848	Tokyo, home to Ajinomoto Stadium where the Brave Blossoms begin their 2019 World Cup campaign against Russia on Sept. 20, claimed the most volunteers with 2,400.
8849	Told that no new Syrians could be registered in the city, he tried to register in the nearby city of Bursa, but was unable to gather the required documents and gave up.
8850	To make a corrosive effect of living new the sea, a salt solution is applied through a nozzle into the unit, creating a mist that coats the whole product.
8851	To make a temporary commitment is radically different than making a life commitment.
8852	To make room on the 25-man roster, the Yankees optioned right-hander Jonathan Loaisiga to Triple-A Scranton/Wilkes-Barre.
8853	To make the first hole, you have to make an effort, and not everyone can carefully open the tin to the end.
8854	To make the process of adding emoji to our phones more democratic Stolk created, Emoji Voter, a web-based app where people can vote for which emoji should appear on our keyboards.
8855	To mark the occasion, Abe's ultra-conservative government granted pardons to about 550,000 eligible applicants.
8856	Tom Brady has put up some impressive numbers throughout his 19-year career in the NFL.
8857	“To me, he appeared in bad shape.”
8858	To me this is very interesting.
8859	Tom Selleck was one of a kind, and Higgins was spectacular.
8860	"Tonight, voters in Kentucky sent a message, loud and clear, for everyone to hear," Beshear said.
8861	Took it outside.
8862	Too often access to a spare room and some spare cash are what divide the haves from the have-nots trying to break into the low-paid creative industries.
8863	Too often they have trouble using taxpayers’ funds wisely (if not improperly) or abusing their positions, critics claim.
8864	To paraphrase Benjamin Franklin, there are two things guaranteed in life: death and sponsorship deals.
8865	To pay for it, lawmakers wanted to re-establish the penalty for failing to comply with the federal health coverage mandate.
8866	To press home his point and probably to placate his domestic critics, Duterte brought up the PCA ruling with Xi.
8867	To provide more campus housing, the university hopes to break ground soon on a new 420-bed residence hall on Bluford Street.
8868	To pull this off, we need everyone from spouses and kids to parents and grandparents.
8869	To put that in perspective, the average lethal dose of potassium cyanide is about a tenth of a gram.
8870	Toronto Film Review: ‘Sing Me A Song’
8871	TORONTO -- The Toronto Public Library is coming under fire over its refusal to cancel an event featuring a speaker who believes transgender rights endanger women, with several authors vowing to boycott the institution's events in light of its decision.
8872	Tortoise Capital Advisors L.L.C. raised its holdings in shares of Targa Resources by 10.9% during the fourth quarter.
8873	To save the library’s materials from a caving ceiling, staff has had to move around heavy bookshelves.
8874	To say this place is hooked up is an understatement.
8875	Toshihide Kanaya, Second Secretary at the Embassy of Japan in Trinidad and Tobago at the J-CCCP presentation.
8876	To solve that problem, she learned to tamp the wax down once it warmed up during the manufacturing process.
8877	To summarize, the anime is all over the map and is confusing to long-time manga readers.
8878	To that end, a multiphase project to create new, modern student housing for UW students has taken a major step forward with action by the UW Board of Trustees Thursday, according to a press release.
8879	To that end, he’s working to obtain a liquor license, and to add televisions and outdoor seating.
8880	To the plasmid the scientists added the encoded instructions for Crispr enzymes that would target Salmonella DNA.
8881	To the shock of us all, in early August 2019–Liam and Miley called it quits after less than a year of marriage.
8882	Tottenham have known they will have to replace Lloris soon, with the French International revealing that he will not be finishing his career in North London due to his desire to play in the MLS.
8883	Tottenham's title charge came to an end with defeats against Burnley and Chelsea, but three points against fourth-place Arsenal would lift spirits and put a healthy buffer between those chasing the final Champions League spot and Pochettino's side.
8884	Touring for Fever 333 will resume starting on October 4th in Council Bluffs, IA.
8885	Tourism is an important sector of the county’s economy.
8886	To view these stamps in 3D, red-cyan anaglyph glasses are required.
8887	Towering above Euston Road, parallel to the iconic St. Pancras Renaissance Hotel, The Standard is in the heart of the ever-buzzing King’s Cross.
8888	Tower View Investment Management & Research LLC cut its stake in Rockwell Automation (NYSE:ROK) by 97.4% in the fourth quarter, according to the company in its most recent Form 13F filing with the Securities & Exchange Commission.
8889	TOYOTA CITY, Japan: Wales coach Warren Gatland named the following team to play Georgia in their Rugby World Cup Pool D match at the City of Toyota Stadium on Monday.
8890	To you, America, I ask: What is the breaking point?
8891	Trade protectionism has a number of implications for the world economy.
8892	Traders in Sabon-Gari Market, Kano have rejected the compulsory use of a commercial solar energy power supply over what they called high charges by the providers.
8893	Trade tensions between India and the US have been rising with Trump complaining that tariffs imposed by New Delhi on American products were ‘no longer acceptable’.
8894	Trade unions have called for talks with PSA which owns both Peugeot and Citroen as well as Opel and Vauxhall.
8895	Traditional Art of the Pie All-Butter Dough An all-butter crust is not as flaky as a butter and leaf lard crust, but the flavor can’t be beat.
8896	Traditionally, she receives powers from special Kree technology, which the trailers allude to.
8897	Traditionally the convention has rotated between a Chicago area site and a downstate site.
8898	Traffic came to a stop and he was unable to avoid rear-ending a pickup truck.
8899	Tragically, 10 men – Bobby Sands, Francis Hughes, Raymond McCreesh, Patsy O’Hara, Joe McDonnell, Martin Hurson, Kevin Lynch, Kieran Doherty, Thomas McElwee and Michael Devine – died on hunger strike the following year.
8900	Trained docents often lead tours of the Executive Mansion, which was built with slave labor in 1813 and is the oldest active governor’s residence in the country.
8901	Trains will run on a weekday schedule and a traffic detail will be added at the bridge from Queens, though cars — as always on Roosevelt — are discouraged.
8902	Trampoline Workout: What to Expect From a Rebounder WorkoutDying to Try a Trampoline Workout?
8903	Transport for Wales (TfW) said rail travellers should check journeys before travelling.
8904	TrashBolt increases sales by giving shoppers what they want.
8905	Trastuzumab is used in the initial treatment of breast cancer when cancerous cells are multiplying rapidly, whereas Ruxolitinib is for patients suffering from Myelofibrosis, a cancer of the bone marrow.
8906	Treasury alleged the individuals hit by sanctions had enriched themselves through government contracts, including Maduro’s stepsons Walter, Yosser and Yoswal Gavidia.
8907	Treasury has said it’s reviewing Grassley’s request.
8908	Tremble's vast business management experience is ideally suited to continue its commitment to highly personalized client service while embracing new technologies to expand its capabilities.
8909	Trinity took a 21-19 lead in the second set after a kill from junior middle hitter Amaya Willer, who led her team with 14 kills.
8910	TRON (TRX) traded 0.3% higher against the dollar and now trades at $0.0136 or 0.00000167 BTC.
8911	TrueChain (TRUE) traded up 2.2% against the dollar and now trades at $1.12 or 0.00013150 BTC.
8912	True - that, and "Squirrel!" as Trump and his cohort's lawbreaking are exposed.
8913	Truly? and the Government fought it in the courts?
8914	Trump also repeatedly told the Ukrainian leader, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, to talk with his personal lawyer Rudy Giuliani, who had been urging the government in Kyiv to investigate Biden and his family, according to two other people briefed on the call.
8915	Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping at the G-20 Summit last month agreed to move forward with negotiations and hold off on new tariffs.
8916	Trump claimed during a recent meeting with business executives before bringing them into the room, according to two people present.
8917	Trump has countered with his own contrivance, called the "Growth in the Americas" program.
8918	Trump has denied allegations of a quid pro quo, and Taylor testified that Sondland said the president told him "it was not a quid pro quo."
8919	Trump has long viewed his personal relationships with leaders, including Mr. Erdogan, as key to accomplishing his foreign policy goals.
8920	Trump insists the conversation was “perfect.”
8921	Trump laced into O’Rourke, who was holding a nearby rally of his own, as a prime example.
8922	Trump later released a rough transcript of a phone conversation with Ukraine's president in which he asks for an investigation of Biden.
8923	Trump officials point out that more than half of those who’ve purchased straws had never previously given to the president’s campaign.
8924	Trump rails against Mueller report, Nadler, Schiff and continued investigationsSkip to main contentThanks for contacting us.
8925	Trump should have made him ambassador to Iceland, I hear he’s good with winter sports.
8926	Trump's national-emergency declaration will anyway be lawyered to death.
8927	Trump’s tariffs — especially the levies he’s imposed on more than $360 billion worth of Chinese imports — have unsettled businesses and contributed to an economic slowdown in the United States and abroad.
8928	Trump told supporters at a rally in New Hampshire that he wants to re-open mental institutions across the country, but did not provide details on his proposal.
8929	Trump was less definitive about a time frame for such a meeting with Rouhani.
8930	Trump was then asked about the apparent marker markings, to which he replied: “I don’t know.”
8931	Trump won't be watching.
8932	Trunk or treat, costume contest, painted pumpkin contest, chili cookoff, cake walk and photo booth.
8933	Try doing that some time.
8934	“Trying to look at it from the U.S. perspective, Poland is centrally located on the Eastern flank.
8935	Try saying that infinitesimal, small number out loud.
8936	Tsakane – Tsakane Secondary School Grade Eight learner, Ncobile Mathebula would like to compete in the national Maths Olympiad.
8937	T-shirts were for sale for $15 at the event, but it was not designed to be a fundraiser, more of an awareness campaign.
8938	Tsipras' patchwork government showed today its darkest, most authoritarian side.
8939	Tucker Carlson says MSNBC's Chris Hayes is 'what every man would be if feminists ever achieved absolute power'
8940	Tuesday, he got candid with Good Morning America, sharing that he was recently dealt a blow in his fight against cancer.
8941	Tuesday, Sept. 24, 1 to 3 p.m. – Laceyville Borough Building, 324 Church St., Laceyville.
8942	Turena Johnson led the Warrior girls’ cross country team by winning the 20-team Princeton Invitational in a personal best 11:23 for the 3,200 meters.
8943	Turkey remains Georgia’s largest trading partner with USD 1.1 billion in January-August of 2019, followed by Russia, Azerbaijan, China and Ukraine with USD 903.9 million, USD 682.5 million, USD 670.5 million and USD 417.3 million, respectively.
8944	Turkey’s latest acquisition of S-400 Air Defence missiles systems from Russia has brought its relations with United States to its lowest point.
8945	Turkish artillery fire and Turkish-backed fighters came dangerously close to three American positions, US and Kurdish officials said.
8946	Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan in Istanbul, July 15. Former Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu’s remarks in an interview last week show that Erdogan tried to control him.
8947	Turner said those in the deep south of the city could just drive 10 minutes west or east (preferably east) outside the city limits to find some darker skies.
8948	Turn north (right) onto Ramsay Concession 8 at the Auld Kirk Church and Cemetery, and travel approximately 100 m. Park on the shoulder on either side of the road, other than in front of the gate.
8949	Turns out the pair actually bonded over a shared love of the ocean.
8950	Twee apothecary jars of creamy unguents that we don’t know what to do with.
8951	Twenty-one states discourage or forbid schools near such sites.
8952	Twenty-seven per cent of recipients were Indigenous.
8953	Twenty years after its return to China, it retains a mixture of East and West in its cuisine and in its architecture, which has won it a UNESCO listing as a World Heritage Site.
8954	Twinkle Khanna and Akshay Kumar bumped into veteran actress Rekha while they were posing for photos.
8955	Twitter has not yet updated its services in France to provide the required transparency.
8956	Twitter’s move is the company’s latest attempt to manage inflammatory tweets while trying to avoid accusations of favoring one political side over another.
8957	Two decades later, Venezuela is an economic and humanitarian wreck.
8958	Two estimates were presented for the construction of a fence around the dump.
8959	Two Harbors Investment had a negative net margin of 35.93% and a positive return on equity of 14.23%.
8960	Two investment analysts have rated the stock with a sell rating, two have issued a hold rating and eight have issued a buy rating to the stock.
8961	Two men were shot, one of them killed Sunday in Back of the Yards on the South Side.
8962	Two migrants interviewed by The Associated Press said the airstrike hit a compound that houses a weapons warehouse and an adjacent detention center holding about 150 migrants, including several Sudanese and Moroccans.
8963	Two more Titans finished in the top ten as junior Jacob Smith and senior Anthony Alfaro finished in sixth and eighth place respectively.
8964	Two other jobs are also available, as the island manager and castle steward.
8965	Two recent polls both have 55% of Dems wanting to be somewhat moderate with 40% going further left.
8966	Two TheatreWorks employees — company manager and artistic producer — will be laid off effective Dec. 31, and one TheatreWorks producer will be hired in their place.
8967	Two weeks after the Chicago Teachers Union suspended its 11-day strike and sent 300,000 kids back to school, the union’s 25,000 members approved their new contract and officially ended their strike.
8968	Two weeks ago, I was looking for a book to read, having just finished one and not wanting to face an evening without a successor.
8969	Two well-known cordials from Italy are Aperol and Amaretto.
8970	Two years ago, Villarreal coached Eastlake’s 12U all-star team to within one win of advancing to the western regional tournament.
8971	Two years of data from several sources have gone into that calculation, according to Ione Challborn, executive director of Canadian Mental Health Association – Edmonton Region.
8972	Tybee Island is the result of run-off from the Savannah River.
8973	Tydor only saw the shofar four months later, in late January 1945, as he and thousands of other prisoners were forced by the SS guards to set out from Auschwitz on the infamous Death March.
8974	Typically, the team that wins the toss chooses to play defense first so it knows what it will take to win when it has the ball.
8975	Tyson Fury speaks like a prime minster and he dresses like a Hawaiian tour guide.
8976	TYSON MIDAKA: “I think security needs to be beefed up because one day these thugs will enter the school premises during the day and learners will be in danger.”
8977	Uber Head of Payments Peter Hazlehurst addresses the audience during an products launch event in San Francisco, California, on September 26, 2019.
8978	Ubiq can be purchased on these cryptocurrency exchanges: LiteBit.
8979	UBS Group AG boosted its holdings in iShares US Preferred Stock ETF by 56.9% during the second quarter.
8980	UCM, by comparison, did not make the cut by either organization.
8981	UEFA member associations are encouraged and supported if they decide to establish and develop their own programmes and activities outside Europe, hence SFZ chose BFA as a partner.
8982	UK lawmakers have voiced their support for a three-step plan that could allow them to delay the UK's departure from the EU.
8983	Ukraine’s newly elected President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has cast the deal as an intermediate step needed to organize a summit with the leaders of Russia, France and Germany to push for a peaceful settlement.
8984	Ultimately it all depends on how the developer chooses to use the hardware, whether it be a newly tuned SoC, beefier shared RAM, or in next-gen's case, a more synergized SSD solution.
8985	“Ultimately, what it seems to come down to more than anything is not how many whips and chains are involved, but rather how openly are you willing to talk about the sex that you’re having in the most blatant of terms,” she says.
8986	Ultra’s total supply is 1,000,000,000 tokens and its circulating supply is 90,526,320 tokens.
8987	UMass opened up the score in 24th minute off the foot of Lauren Bonavita, giving the away team a 1-0 lead — an advantage they wouldn’t control again until there were ten minutes left in regulation.
8988	“Under a new rate framework announced today, approximately 2,700 non-profits were scheduled to have their rates increased.
8989	Under continuous signup, producers also receive incentives, including a signup incentive payment and a practice incentive payment.
8990	Under current law, the state attorney general’s office cannot prosecute gun-trafficking cases without a referral from a district attorney.
8991	Under Kishor group, one can get loans between Rs 50,000 to Rs 5,00,000 while Rs 5 lakh to Rs 10 lakh is granted under Tarun.
8992	Underlying economic momentum has decelerated sharply, as reflected in Q1FY20 real GDP growth of 5% and the ’s latest downward revision in the FY20 GDP growth forecast to 6.1% (from 6.9%).
8993	Under the president’s new plan, 234 miles of wall made from steel bollards will be constructed along the border.
8994	Under the previous contracts, however, the towing fee ranged from $90 to $120 between the four towing zones.
8995	Under the system, people can make donations to prefectures or municipalities of their choice, which do not necessarily have to be their hometowns.
8996	Undoubtedly, Ethiopia forward Abera took centre-stage with three goals to reach the 20-goal mark this season.
8997	Unfortunately, according to Cllr Gallagher, Jonathan Doherty’s story is just the tip of the iceberg locally.
8998	Unfortunately, FedEx Cup points usurp style points, so Hovland won’t be joining fellow All-Americans and new professional sensations Matthew Wolff and Collin Morikawa on the tour after each won a tour event in July.
8999	Unfortunately for those in the U.K., France, Italy, Germany and other Western European countries, Disney+ won’t be available until March 31st, 2020.
9000	Unfortunately, it’s unclear if Zuckerberg meant 0.5% of ads were political or just from politicians without counting issue ads and PACs.
9001	Unfortunately, smoking was nearly ubiquitous during the ’60s, and Fonda, as a counter-culture rebel in the ’60s, was no stranger to cigarettes.
9002	Unfortunately, that kind of structure is something most small businesses, including mine, lack.
9003	Unfortunately, that's about the last time Marvel stuck to the lore behind Mjolnir at all.
9004	Unfortunately, the endless complexities of the English language only muddy the waters.
9005	Unfortunately, the event resulted in injuries to two employees and one contractor at the site.
9006	Unfortunately, the White Walkers hung back and were not touched by Drogon, Viserion or Rhaegal.
9007	Unfortunately, you’ll be liable for any expenses incurred in return to sender parcels in the event the info you provided was inaccurate.
9008	Union Minister for Law & Justice, Communications and Electronics & Information Technology, Ravi Shankar Prasad addressing at the culmination of the National Postal Week, in New Delhi on Tuesday.
9009	United are so far refusing to meet the wage demands of goalkeeper David de Gea, who is out of contract at the end of next season and wants double his existing £240,000-a-week wages, and and Juan Mata, who are free agents this summer.
9010	United hit the bar inside the first 40 seconds through Marcus Rashford but were dominated after going behind.
9011	UNITED NATIONS (AP) — The U.S. and Japan on Wednesday signed a limited trade deal that will eliminate tariffs and expand market access on farm, industrial and digital products.
9012	“Universal background checks should be non-controversial, and yet it is.” she said.
9013	University coach Rob Taylor had mixed feelings about the venue.
9014	University Games Totally Gross!
9015	“Unless there is a law which binds the governments to allocate the fund, the policy per se will not result in the transformation of education in India.
9016	Unless you or someone in your team is an expert you will need to hire an agency to do this for you.
9017	Unless you’re a sociopath or a sex robot, empathy rises up automatically, as does its sister state, compassion.
9018	Unless you're one of the most cultured sophisticates, you may not have a reference for all of the many musical compositions, fancy foods, and wines that Frasier and Niles constantly mention.
9019	Unlike conventional electric and magnetic fields, these synthetic fields are created by varying the structure that light propagates through in both space and time.
9020	Unpredictable bowlers have a history of prospering in Twenty20 cricket.
9021	U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres urged all sides to avoid violence and for security forces to show restraint, saying he hoped for a political solution that would “preserve stability and peace,” his spokesman said.
9022	Unsurprisingly, the Mediterranean diet—common in Israel, as well as Spain and Italy, numbers one and two on the list—was noted in Bloomberg’s analysis.
9023	Until an exasperated Lynelle hit me with a rather profound question: “Who do you want to look like?”
9024	Until his death in 2004, he was the leading figure of various Palestinian militant organizations.
9025	Until recently, being referred to as was just another way of being referred to as an n*gger.
9026	Until then, he moved onto some business with Dominic.
9027	Until this year, the fundraiser was known as the Race for the Cure, Executive Director Jill Eaton said.
9028	Updated September 3, 2019 to add our review of the Naim Mu-so 2nd Generation all-in-one audio system.
9029	Upon a request from Justice Committee Chair Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.
9030	Upon his arrival at the ancient temple, Modi was accorded a grand traditional reception amid chanting of Vedic hymns by the priests, who escorted him to the sanctum sanctorum along with temple officials.
9031	Upon meeting this car it proved cleaner than I’d expected, a rare occurrence.
9032	Uptake in the numbers of girls getting vaccinated increased again last year after it droppd to a low of 50%.
9033	"US$5 million loan from Glencore will assess the suitability of the First Cobalt Refinery to treat Glencore material under a long-term supply agreement to produce cobalt sulfate for the North American electric vehicle market.
9034	US$92.3 million was invested in the eighth month of the year, an 82% expansion compared to the same month last year (US$50.7 million).
9035	… USC got back injured players CB Chris Steele, DE Christian Rector, LB Malik McClain and LB Palaie Gaoteote IV, but lost OL Liam Jimmons and CB Greg Johnson.
9036	U.S. companies pay corporate income taxes domestically when they make money outside the country.
9037	US congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez’s (GND) has attracted a lot of attention.
9038	Use a battery-powered alarm clock, ideally one without any light.
9039	Use a rinse agent to prevent streaks on glass and to get shinier dishes.
9040	Users are able to unlock and approve the transactions through face identification or fingerprint scanning technology.
9041	US Gold’s peers have higher revenue and earnings than US Gold.
9042	Using Axe is like the opposite of pride.
9043	Using the “Your Phone” app on Windows, it is possible to clone the phone’s screen and quickly access the SMS, notifications or Camera Roll (for drag & drop copies).
9044	Using your phone number for two-factor authentication, or 2FA, is susceptible to hacks.
9045	“Us” is a densely packed and highly rewarding film that rewards multiple viewings.
9046	US President Donald Trump and Queen Elizabeth II joined 300 veterans in paying tribute to their fallen comrades at a poignant ceremony on Wednesday marking the 75th anniversary of D-Day.
9047	U Wirathu is currently on the run from an arrest warrant.
9048	VanBockel suggested Schatz and McRoberts discuss in the future any questions or concerns either may have regarding newspaper editorial vs. formal minutes.
9049	Vancouver area MP Mark Warawa wasn’t playing along this week, and his refusal to sing from the PMO song sheet sparked a mini-rebellion that spoke volumes about the frustration and impotence many feel.
9050	Vancouver Mayor Kennedy Stewart wants a Health Canada exemption from federal drug laws so a safe substitute opioid could be distributed through a non-profit organization to prevent overdose deaths from potentially dangerous drugs laced with fentanyl.
9051	Van Gaal survived the leg break during the early part of the 2007-08 season, but his position became increasingly precarious.
9052	Vanguard Group Inc. bought a new stake in shares of Avantor during the 2nd quarter valued at about $374,354,000.
9053	Vanguard Group Inc. now owns 642,614 shares of the bank’s stock worth $22,407,000 after acquiring an additional 19,108 shares during the period.
9054	Vanguard Tax-Exempt Bond ETF accounts for approximately 1.4% of Redhawk Wealth Advisors Inc.’s portfolio, making the stock its 27th largest position.
9055	V.A. Prepares for Major Shift in Veterans’ Health Care - The New York TimesV.
9056	Various southern African states would like to discuss the possibility of a controlled trade in African elephant ivory.
9057	Vauxhall High School needs the same, though they have three washrooms with a total of seven urinals for $35,000.
9058	VCU Investment Management Co now owns 275,720 shares of the company’s stock worth $8,922,000 after buying an additional 28,908 shares during the period.
9059	VENICE, Italy (AP) — As soon as waters receded from this week’s devastating flood, about 50 young Venetians wearing rubber…
9060	Venice Magazine’s Five-Year Anniversary Bash at W Fort Lauderdale: Nearly 700 of South Florida’s influencers and VIPs gathered to celebrate ’s Five-Year Anniversary Bash at the W Fort Lauderdale.
9061	Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders’ campaign website features his stands on 25 issues, but housing is not among them.
9062	Very nice words coming from a man who is now faced with the consequences of honouring the Constitution as it relates to dual citizenship.
9063	Very sad to see.”
9064	Very strong, very stable at the moment.
9065	Veteran actor Sylvester Stallone says he never intended his fan-favourite characters — Rocky and Rambo — to be political.
9066	Veterans Day continues to be observed on November 11, regardless of what day of the week on which it falls.
9067	Veteran’s Month Remote Cleanups in the Marquesas (between Key West and the Dry Tortugas) –
9068	Veterans of the 1970s liberation struggle, have called on government to ensure their children are given jobs despite lack of qualifications, claiming their offsprings have been denied a lot of chances.
9069	Vialli, 55, revealed last November that he had been battling cancer for a year, and recently announced that he was still undergoing treatment in a battle to "live a normal life".
9070	Vice Chancellor Willie Banks explained that the recent rankings strike a perpetual pride in his heart.
9071	Vice President Bawumia said the Government of Ghana enacted Renewable Energy Act in 2011 to create the enabling environment to attract the requisite investments into the energy sector.
9072	Vicki Elliot’s brother thanked Gov. Ron DeSantis for signing the warrant for his execution and Chanel Williams’ mother said the execution gives her peace of mind knowing justice has been done.
9073	Victorian Villani, 30, joined the Stars this year after four seasons with the Perth Scorchers.
9074	Victory Capital Management Inc. now owns 3,260,797 shares of the basic materials company’s stock worth $238,397,000 after purchasing an additional 1,043,805 shares during the last quarter.
9075	Video also shows Copeland shooting Ledgett after becoming agitated.
9076	Video footage of the disruption going on at shoprite in Osapa london, lekkipic.
9077	Video game developer, Visual Concepts, is back for another year of basketball simulation with their newest entry “NBA 2K20.”
9078	Videograb of a field in Baniari village where the birds were found dead.
9079	Video: Inside Emirates Palace's most expensive.
9080	Vidinha Stadium hosted a high school baseball preseason tournament matchup between Kaua‘i and Lahainaluna Feb. 9. Kaua‘i High won, 23-0.
9081	Vijay Kalantri-owned Balaji Infra has 51.01 percent stake in Dighi Port, while Infrastructure Leasing & Financial Services (IL&FS) holds 39.37 percent stake in the company.
9082	Vikrant Massey and Shriya Pilgaonkar were part of season 1 as well, but their characters — — were killed off in the finale.
9083	Village officials speak on fire volunteer shortage, water works repairs, Godfrey Park renovation – WLDSWhat’s On Your Mind?
9084	“Villagers are required to have certifications such as the ‘jaati praman patra’, and there are many who don’t have it.
9085	Villwock’s favorite part of this event is getting to participate in it.
9086	Vintage FM owner Wayne Willmington is looking to sell the station due to personal reasons and is hoping new local owners will take control.
9087	Virginia Willis provided some details of that legacy, specifically noting the teachers who helped students overcome hand-me-down, outdated textbooks passed down when the white students got new books.
9088	Virtually all climate scientists worth their salt agree that human activity is changing the climate, with potentially catastrophic consequences.
9089	Virtu Financial LLC owned about 0.73% of Histogenics at the end of the most recent reporting period.
9090	Visitation for Agnes Fisher will take place from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m., Monday, November 18, 2019 at Stevenson Funeral Home in Dickinson.
9091	Visitation will be after 4:00pm on Monday, with a rosary at 5:00pm and a scriptural prayer service at 7:00pm, all at the church.
9092	Visit HoldingsChannel.com to get the latest 13F filings and insider trades for Brookfield Property Reit Inc (NASDAQ:BPR).
9093	Visit HoldingsChannel.com to get the latest 13F filings and insider trades for CONMED Co. (NASDAQ:CNMD).
9094	Visit HoldingsChannel.com to get the latest 13F filings and insider trades for Franklin Resources, Inc. (NYSE:BEN).
9095	Visit HoldingsChannel.com to get the latest 13F filings and insider trades for Greenlane Holdings (NASDAQ:GNLN).
9096	Visitors can also experience the Mars Yard and the Tinkertoreum where aspiring engineers can build a rover to race down the museum’s moonscape terrain.
9097	Visit our website for information about our canine and feline guests and all of our services, programs and events: http://www.mendoanimalshelter.com For more information about adoptions please call 707-467-6453.
9098	Visit the site for more details on subway service changes.
9099	Visit www.indiasciencefest.org/participate to be a speaker at India Science Fest 2020.
9100	Vitae (CURRENCY:VITAE) traded 53.1% higher against the US dollar during the 24-hour period ending at 16:00 PM ET on August 17th.
9101	Volkov has also noted this is just one minute short of the “Ultimate Edition” of Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, which is the longest-running modern superhero film.
9102	Volunteers walked the shoreline Friday in search of missing fisherman Jordan Hicken.
9103	Von Reventlow joined the telco in November 2018 and is said to be leaving to return home to his family.
9104	• Vote on license agreements with passenger-only ferry lines Island Commuter Corp. and Hyannis Harbor Tours, Inc.
9105	Voters will also consider three ballot questions to exempt spending from Proposition 2 1/2, the state tax cap.
9106	Voting opens for SDOT's Neighborhood Street Fund projects - Queen Anne & Magnolia News Search only accepts letters and numbers.
9107	VR Teja, the current assistant superintendent of police, Mangroi has been promoted as DCP and he will replace Makwana.
9108	VS a 44% decrease in heart attacks.
9109	WACO, Texas (AP) — JaMycal Hasty scored on a 5-yard run in the second overtime and No. 22 Baylor won in its first game as a ranked team under coach Matt Rhule.
9110	Waldoboro police and fire departments responded to a report of a single-vehicle rollover on Manktown Road west of Medomak Valley High School at about 1:30 p.m. Jan.
9111	Wales have embarked on quite the campaign of late, gathering a grand slam, a record winning run and the kudos of being No 1 in the world — and they’ve done it with scarcely a whiff of the sort of try to quicken the pulses back home.
9112	Walkers are reflected in a bog road puddle during the Shades Of Autumn 10k walk in aid of the RNLI on bank Holiday Monday at Shragh.
9113	Walmart heir Rob Walton and real estate developer Richard LeFrak got J.D.s from Columbia Law School.
9114	Walmart spokeswoman LeMia Jenkins said in an email that no staff members were involved in the shooting and the store was not evacuated.
9115	Walton is on what his family called the “No Regrets Tour,” a personal mission to visit all 50 states and the White House to educate Americans about World War II veterans.
9116	Wanchain (WAN) traded 5.6% higher against the dollar and now trades at $0.38 or 0.00003105 BTC.
9117	Wanting to remove it anyway, the project manager from Milkwaukee, Wisconsin, put off surgery for five months while busy with work.
9118	Want to import images?
9119	Want to see what other hedge funds are holding FIVE?
9120	Want to see what other hedge funds are holding RDY?
9121	“War and Remembrance,” an even more lavish production extending over 30 hours at a cost of more than $110 million, was broadcast in 1988 but attracted a smaller audience.
9122	War, disease, death — why worry?
9123	Warner Bros had defended the film, saying the aim of storytelling is to “provoke difficult conversations around complex issues.”
9124	Warner, South Dakota native Derrek Tuszka recorded back-to-back sacks on SDSU's last drive to help seal the victory.
9125	WARNING: “Colin M. Angle Sells 11,486 Shares of iRobot Co. (IRBT) Stock” was originally reported by American Banking News and is the property of of American Banking News.
9126	Warnings can often be ignored, but these bluntly honest signs ensure that everyone takes them seriously.
9127	WARNING: “Schwab Fundamental International Large Company Index (FNDF) Shares Sold by Wealthstreet Investment Advisors LLC” was published by Daily Political and is the property of of Daily Political.
9128	Warren Averett Asset Management LLC’s holdings in United Technologies were worth $427,000 as of its most recent SEC filing.
9129	Wars are the costliest activity that governments have ever invented.
9130	WASHINGTON (AP) — U.S. long-term mortgage rates held steady this week, offering a potential boon to homebuyers amid an uncertain economic outlook.
9131	Washington at Vegas, 6 p.m.
9132	"Was the firearm at your place to enable you to protect yourself if the need arose?"
9133	Was this their attempt at a full circle?
9134	WATCH ABOVE: Cool and rainy weather weather is exacerbating what has already been a difficult year for beekeepers in central Alberta, according to the head of an industry association in the province.
9135	WATCH: A British sailor walked away from Nova Scotia Supreme Court a free man Friday after being acquitted on allegations of gang rape.
9136	Watching how difficult it was for his mother to weave cloth on a manual loom, Sakichi Toyoda began making simple improvements in the device.
9137	Watching the game was reminiscent of kids playing ball hockey on the street, except they didn’t have to pause and drag the nets to the side as there were no cars driving by.
9138	Watching the West Indies-born pacer take on the likes of Ross Taylor and Kane Williamson will be fascinating.
9139	Watch Nick Kyrgios’ at the US Open on KAYO Sports.
9140	Watch our Farmeye intro video to sequestration in soil under permanent grassland https://t.
9141	Watch out for a lot of talk about a united Ireland — but the route won’t be smooth.
9142	Watch the full video above for more.
9143	Watch the video in full below.
9144	Watch: The Waorani people of Pastaza in Ecuador won a historic court battle protecting half a million acres of their territory in the Amazon rainforest from being drilled for oil.
9145	Watch this column and other media for more information soon.
9146	Water can also be used.
9147	Water can be supplied in a birdbath, small pool, recirculating waterfall, shallow dish or from a drip-ping hose.
9148	“Water coming from a glacier is not pure water, it looks great, but don’t assume it’s pure fresh water.”
9149	Water districts that receive water from the Central Valley Project threatened to walk away from voluntary agreements being negotiated between them and state regulatory agencies.
9150	Waterford lost goalkeeper Darren Mulhearne to injury in the warm-up which was not the start to the game the Waterford manager wanted.
9151	Water is saving, as seen in Jesus’ washing of the disciples’ feet, but also deadly, as exhibited in the flood.
9152	Waves of new media darlings have tried to unseat YouTube, with no success.
9153	WAYCROSS, Ga. (CBS Local) — Santa Claus is looking for a new gig after a mall in southeast Georgia pulled him for wearing a Trump 2020 hat while on duty.
9154	Wayne, as he was called by family and friends, was born in Shongaloo, Louisiana but moved to Minden when he was about 10 years old.
9155	WBA started out with a 28-27 overtime loss to Crestwood, hung on to defeat Scranton 37-28 and then blanked Nanticoke Area 42-0.
9156	“We actually entered an appearance in the Trump case in the Ninth Circuit yesterday and we’ll take over all her legal matters.”
9157	“We advise Alhaji Atiku Abubakar not to touch Fani-Kayode and his cohorts with a long pole.
9158	We all have people in our lives whom we wish it was a little easier to get a hold of during Christmas.
9159	We all need to prevent that from happening.
9160	We also have a feature on trans and black Ashlee Marie Preston in honor of Black History Month coverage.
9161	“We also have quick access to video streaming so one click and you can watch video from broadcast.
9162	“We also last month saw six sales above the million mark, so that obviously has a little bit of impact on the upper end of single-family home market as well,” he says, adding there were zero sales above a million dollars in January.
9163	'We apologise for the inconvenience and we thank you for your patience,' a statement on Eurostar's website said.
9164	We apologize if this is causing any inconvenience.
9165	“We are all elected to this house to work for the people and we must try to do this.
9166	“We are also looking at and still discussing on an additional package for Mukanya, where we will give him a residential stand which is likely to be in Cranborne…it’s something that we are still discussing,” Gomba said.
9167	We are a sea of women, and yet we make islands out of each other.
9168	“We are blessed with the support of alumni who help make these scholarships possible.
9169	"We are concerned that while such procedures are successfully employed in multiple sports they have not been adopted by professional football," it added.
9170	“We are confident that eOne takes these matters seriously and that they will continue to look for the best ways to surface concerns and address complaints,” ABC and ABC Studios said in a joint statement.
9171	We are confident that we will fight and win the next war with the indigenous weapon system,” the Army chief said.
9172	We are considering all legal avenues to challenge this decision."
9173	We are currently losing the battle against e-cigarettes and vaping, and we do not even understand the cause.
9174	We are deeply saddened by the passing of Hall of Famer and Sports Ambassador Danny Grant.
9175	We are focused and ready to not just vacate the scandalous judgement, but obtaining the mandate which Rivers people are eager to offer Chief Dumo Lulu-Briggs.
9176	"We are glad Cachet has introduced a novel dynamic insurance product that allows our drivers to work as often as they like while being able to pay a fair price for insurance," said Karin Kase, spokesperson for Bolt.
9177	We are going to bury them at the same place,” he said.
9178	We are hearing reports of indiscriminate killings, sexual violence, villages being burnt down and other forms of depravity against men, women and children,” she said.
9179	“We are here nine years later, and Haiti remains a sovereign independent country.
9180	We are just implementing the law.
9181	“We are not being clinical like we should be in some moments, and that is going against us, but I’m not worried.
9182	"We are playing for a big chance," said Conte.
9183	"We are really working on giving the ADAs the tools they need," Harrington said.
9184	We are still facing retrenchments," Berger said.
9185	We are still looking for talent.
9186	We are sure that the entire custody battle will make things intense and that’s what we want right!
9187	“We are taking time to evaluate the right marketing strategy going forward,” he said.
9188	We are therefore pleading with anyone whose child is missing or if their child had witnessed or is aware of the alleged kidnapping or abduction incident to come forward or call Crime Stoppers on 919.
9189	We are the world's learning company.
9190	We are unsure at this point, what the suspect used to stab the couple since no weapon was recovered at the crime scene.
9191	We are winning the culture war.
9192	“We are worried about current moves by some self-interest seeking elements within the political space to distort the zoning arrangement which was by mutual consensus by the founding fathers of Bayelsa of which I am privileged to be part of.
9193	"We ask that everyone please avoid the area as first responders work on securing the scene."
9194	"We aspire to the same set of things, but we have limits," Beutner told a morning news conference.
9195	“We, as you know, have been pressing for justice in the Khashoggi case for months now.
9196	Weather forecasters say a wintry mix of snow and rain is expected throughout the region by Wednesday.
9197	We believe Just Energy needs to demonstrate its ability to continue to add more customers to its customers base in order for its EBITDA growth to be sustainable.
9198	We believe these interpretations are seriously flawed and do not account for the full picture of our global vigilance over generic drug manufacturing.
9199	“We both agreed that it’s time and that this type of change is a win-win,” Epstein told reporters, adding of Maddon: “There’s going to be a bidding war for his services, and there should be.
9200	We came out of that time with some awesome successes: Our cartridges were the first to be strain specific; Kurvana became known for delivering a consistent head change, unrivaled potency, and clean oil.
9201	"We came together as youth from the areas around this park and formed the group," a tour-guide Johnston Ole Tuiya said.
9202	We came up with a number of ideas and recommendations,” Tadesse told IPS.
9203	We can all thank Bill for ruining how DBs are allowed to cover WRs beyond 5 yards….
9204	“We can confirm that last week we were made aware that an alleged racist comment had been made by an agency teacher working within the school,” the school said in a statement.
9205	We cannot ignore the political realities that are driving these developments, because they partly influence what we can do about it.
9206	We cannot send troops into Hong Kong any more than we could into Hungary in 1956.
9207	“We can provide multiple ways for you to access and customize your device.
9208	We can retool the game where they can still glean the benefits, enjoy themselves, get exercise and delay tackle football until junior high or high school.”
9209	We can’t hold on much longer.”
9210	We can't tell which way they're moving, but by looking at where lions are more closely related, we can see where genes are being moved.
9211	We closed the day, December 17 2019, at a price of $6,640.
9212	We collected about 300 signatures demanding the council give us the go-ahead and have the temporary unit placed on site for at least part of the school holidays.
9213	We could have another minority government or another hung parliament.
9214	We couldn't see anyone else in the role, right?
9215	We currently live in North Carolina.
9216	“We developed this office building in 1986,” Leonard said, confirming the site of the capsule.
9217	We did have some struggles at the plate but backed it up with great defense that kept us in the games and won us the district championship.
9218	We didn’t have this in mind at all when making FFVII.
9219	We didn’t love that version’s white-on-white keyboard backlighting, but this on-sale version’s black-and-red coloring is much better.
9220	We didn’t want to have a situation like some of these other teams are having where they’ve got 20 guys out during the week.”
9221	We’d know the date and time of the megatsunami to minutes and everyone would of course leave the coastal cities along with all precious possessions etc long before that date.
9222	Wednesday at a bigaplex near you: Bruce Springsteen’s “Western Stars.”
9223	☀️ Wednesday, July 31ALL DAY• Carver Kings - Back by popular demand!
9224	"We'd never heard a story about a child at a residential school, much less what it was like there for all of these kids."
9225	"We do not talk enough about trans Americans, especially African American trans Americans, and the incredibly high rates of murder right now," Booker said.
9226	“We don’t believe that if you are powerful, well-connected (and) have donated illegally to our party, that you should be able to call up the prime minister’s office and have laws changed to get you off of criminal responsibility,” he said.
9227	We don't get to vote Windsors or Windsor wives off the Buckingham Palace balcony, so it was reassuring to see the Sussexes in a display of happy unity with the Cambridges at the polo last Wednesday — perhaps to reverse the Wimbledon optics.
9228	We don't know what culture produced these things.
9229	'We don't know what will be delivered but we will have a delivery every week.
9230	We don’t need them coming in onSept.
9231	“We don’t think that would serve Bedford, Mount Kisco or us as the applicant.”
9232	We don’t want world leaders turning solely to our generation for change.
9233	Week after week, fans tuned in to react in real-time as more and more ludicrous discoveries were made.
9234	“We encourage students to reach out.”
9235	“We expect a lot of these young maintainers,” said Lee.
9236	We expect investors to take positions in these stocks even as pre-election jitters continue.”
9237	We explained how to get started last week.
9238	“We feel that his handling of our situation has been so outrageously dishonourable and disrespectful that we have a duty to respectfully bring these matters to the direct attention of that local community that have until now voted him into this position.”
9239	“We fell in love as soon as we saw it,” Centrone recalls.
9240	We frequently have breaks between sessions and therapies and though he is losing his hair, he is not losing his appetite for fine food.
9241	We gonna get it together don’t sleep Boston!
9242	“We got it close and they just continued to attack,” said White Sox manager Rick Renteria.
9243	We got it from here, troop.
9244	“We got lucky, because we got to know one another as friends first.”
9245	We go to the Doctor and get a pill or, God forbid, a treatment which consists of shooting us full of poison to kill the toxins that are already killing us.
9246	We had a brief silent moment where I noticed Wale was starring at me dead into the eyes, for a second I thought it was all over.
9247	"We had an early scan and I remember just listening to the consultant say, 'do you want to hear something interesting?'
9248	We had quite a scare on Friday morning.
9249	“We had taken out what we thought was really comprehensive insurance; we had been fully upfront with Maddie’s medical issues.
9250	“We had to go to the other side of Fayetteville to get him,” Mayor Elbert Gibson with a laugh.
9251	… We have a great intelligence apparatus now.
9252	We have also arrested over 1 000 people who have been in court over destruction of property,” he said.
9253	"We have also gone through the observers' reports pertaining to our last elections and we are learning lessons from those reports and we hope and believe that the reports that will come up in the 2023 elections will be different."
9254	“We have an opportunity to shape a new maritime future, create a new business opportunity and drive innovation,” said Sohmen-Pao.
9255	“We have a really defined plan and it’s very unusual, but the people who like us love us and the people who don’t hate us.”
9256	“We have a song that we wrote, and we recorded it.
9257	We have a splendid Test side that's stayed at the top of the rankings and needs to keep up that good work," Shastri told The Times of India.
9258	We have been advocating for ourselves for now more than five years.
9259	We have been sincere and responsible while telling this story."
9260	We have demanded fresh election in West Tripura constituency.
9261	“We have employees that have been with us since the beginning – about 45 years.”
9262	We have expanded the administrative levy to include pipelines and flow lines and hired additional staff.
9263	“We have heard about groups coming to build other churches, but there is nothing like a first-hand experience.
9264	We have more news about the China-U.
9265	We have multiple coding programs catering to different age groups and every program is designed for the students to use each program as an upward step in their career ladder.
9266	We have multiple singers and emcees, a tap dancer, and incredible musicians.”
9267	We have not forced anybody.
9268	We have not seen a player, right at the end of their careers (and thus at the height of their celebrity), flirt with politics, or even run, on the strength of that celebrity alone, save for Charles Barkley, who’s usually just doing it as a goof.
9269	“We haven’t done a major upgrade since 2005 and we’re trying to figure out how to get backup pumps in place,” he said.
9270	We have our own security department on duty 24/7 and cooperate closely with Polizei Berlin as well as our partners from Deutsche Bahn and S-Bahn."
9271	“We have paid our bills.
9272	“We have seen a lot of public sector banks issuing bonds in March to curb the liquidity deficit and by corporates to fulfil the debt framework,” said Ashish Jalan, AVP, SPA Securities.
9273	“We have seen many laudable ideas put together, but in the end they become stillborn and left to decorate the shelves.
9274	“We have some ambitions about where we’d like to see this and where we’d like to see this grow.
9275	We have the chance to build a UK that is not only more prosperous but also fairer.
9276	“We have the truck.
9277	“We have to make an economic impact through science and technology and improve our position on the global innovation index, where we are ranked at 57, currently” he said.
9278	We have to set out a business plan to explain why we are making the rate changes nationally, and then once it has been accepted that information is disseminated out to the local agencies and post offices.
9279	We have to take it on faith that this is indeed a torrid, red-hot affair.
9280	“We have written to the police headquarters and asked them to shift the police station from its current place to a less polluted area,” said a senior police officer of the east district.
9281	We hear from the kids and the music producer on why the brand remains popular decades later.
9282	We hope that the movie could one day be salvaged, but for now, fans shouldn't hold their breath.
9283	We hope to do better next time.
9284	“We hope you stand firm,” said Joseph Kane, with the Parent and Community Advisory Board.
9285	Weighed down by a puzzling discrepancy between their 51 wins at Wrigley Field and 33 road victories, the Cubs finished third the NL Central.
9286	Weight Loss through supplements: Is it Effective?
9287	Weinand was elected to a three-year term in 2016.
9288	We initially picked information that it was over a contract issue but as to the exact contract we are yet to find out.”
9289	“We in same vein commend all other security agencies in their collaborative synergy to ensure Kano is not a hide out for criminals and is totally rid of criminal elements and fully secured.
9290	We in the 70’s did not get paid to clean.
9291	We invite you to review Colorado State University’s Principles of Community (http://diversity.
9292	We just find the "happy to help" message on the back really patronising and insulting.
9293	“We just had this Public Advocate’s special election there were seventeen candidates on the ballot, so I would not be surprised if there would be a robust field for Bronx Borough President, which I think would be good for Bronxites,” said Cohen.
9294	“We just want the baby back.
9295	“We just went out and decorated the whole house for Halloween, so that was cool.”
9296	'We kept going back but they kept stonewalling and we were angry, frustrated and just wanted to make sure we could properly prepare and bury him.
9297	We kill many animals at much higher rates than their other natural predators, and we’re unusual in taking out those predators too.
9298	We kissed and had sex.
9299	We know and it is self-explanatory that cassava if well harnessed can be the money-spinner for the nation so we are working towards utilizing the cassava that is grown on the larger scale,” he said.
9300	We know everyone deserves a home you absolutely love and a workplace where you can be yourself.
9301	We know good dialogue and clever insight when it’s presented.
9302	We know he always pulls left, but many times he pulls right.”
9303	“We know how eager our players are to dive into Blades on the Nintendo Switch,” Bethesda wrote as part of its Blades Town Hall community update, “And we’ve been hard at work to make it happen.
9304	We know that we will gain more by being more transparent.
9305	“We know the enormous strength of this economy, in life sciences, in tech, in academia, music, the arts, culture, financial services.
9306	"We know they (NGOs) are all over in rural areas under the guise of being donors dolling out money to our people.
9307	We know we’re going to get their best shot.
9308	We know why CA legislators “legalized,” marijuana…more tax revenues to spend, without accountability!
9309	Well, according to one report, it seems will stick to the status quo with season four.
9310	We’ll all be dead in five years.
9311	We’ll be updating this post as more offers are made available.
9312	We’ll go back and try to reinforce.”
9313	We’ll have more information when officials make it available.
9314	We’ll have to ask our subs department if someone by the name of John Dotard Drumpf takes out a subscription at 1651 Pennsylvania Avenue, better known as Blair House.
9315	We'll hear incorrectly how Dems are for open borders and depend on undocumented immigrants for votes.
9316	“Well, I picked broccoli as a kid,” says her mom.
9317	Well, I said to the big marina.
9318	Well, I think a couple of things changed.
9319	Well, it’s not the darkness.
9320	"We'll keep it here as long as they need them," said Goliber.
9321	We’ll keep you posted on further developments in our 2,000th.
9322	We’ll see where things between Wendy and Charlamagne go from here.
9323	"We'll see whether change in climate or change in numbers of people living here will correlate to economic loss and damage."
9324	Wells Fargo & Company MN now owns 2,823,997 shares of the company’s stock valued at $142,047,000 after buying an additional 1,210,779 shares during the last quarter.
9325	“We’ll share it when the injury report comes out after practice, and make sure you get a copy,” Belichick told the reporter.
9326	Well, she was born in 1896 and so by that time, you know, she had been making making this recipe for many, many years."
9327	Well, they simply wouldn’t allow it.
9328	Well, they transferred their average same life that they’ve always had, and put it in an RV, and lived exactly the same life.
9329	Well, we don’t.
9330	“We look forward to helping them hone their skills further and share what they have learned with other mechanics in Cebu.
9331	We look forward to many more years of fun.”
9332	We look forward to sharing the Smothers Brothers’ important story and preserving it for future generations.”
9333	“We lost most of our audience right after Trump left,” said a CNN news producer.
9334	We made these protocols that every student had to sign and say it was okay, and that they could withdraw.
9335	We may never know definitively, but based on things over the years and the ways in which diverges drastically from Star Wars: The Force Awakens, it kind of looks like there was never a definitive and overarching plan for the Sequel Trilogy.
9336	We might see each other again, hopefully we have our QB in that game.
9337	WE miss, and love him dearly.
9338	We must also work to build a healthy and stable financial system that will contribute to the growth of our economy, while preserving price stability,” he said.
9339	We must cut greenhouse gas emissions now or face catastrophic consequences, according to the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
9340	We must earn the respect of other countries by ensuring that we have leaders who emerge from the true hearts and souls of the people; not leaders who have bought and paid for our conscience with the aim of reaping the returns on their investments.
9341	We must have one identity,” said Ravi Kishan, a famous action-film hero and member of Parliament who is a central supporter of the citizenship legislation.
9342	"We must stick to our commitment as a pacifist nation.
9343	We must take care not to identify individuals or organisations, who would not otherwise be in danger, as possible targets unless there is an overriding editorial justification.
9344	We need an opposition with a leader of General Miyanda’s integrity.
9345	We need steady-state economic thinking, and to act and work locally and connect globally.
9346	“We need to air bus him home at this point in his condition, which is a very expensive procedure.
9347	“We need to do everything we can to reduce our risk of dementia,” the statement quoted the WHO Director-General, Dr Tedros Ghebreyesus, as saying.
9348	We need to give them the taste of victory again.”
9349	“We need to listen to other viewpoints and try to understand the other side.
9350	We need your help to find out.
9351	We never did an episode where someone was struggling with it, because that would have been a downer.”
9352	"We now need to push it harder."
9353	We organized our first Pride Runs in those years, donating funds raised to organizations providing life-supporting services such as the Whitman-Walker Clinic.
9354	We participated in inter-delegation meetings that were fruitful for our cooperation,” Albayrak said on Twitter.
9355	“We protesters are fighting for values.
9356	“We’re almost probably certain that some of the ones above the (standardized test) cutoff actually need WRI 102 — they did well on the SAT, but when it comes to writing in the form that we expect here, they may not be quite as well off,” Murphy said.
9357	“We’re also pleased to be able to respond to customer feedback by increasing the space available for luggage onboard our longer distance services where customers typically travel with more bags.”
9358	We’re excited to partner with Barry Ryan, David Walton and Michele Buck on another series of one of Britain’s most enjoyable mystery series.”
9359	“We’re going to get you,” Acevedo said of the man.
9360	“We’re here to serve you.
9361	“We’re moving this on to the next level of development,” she said, to “get some of these things to fly.”
9362	"We're not in the playground, we're dealing with the future of the world economy and every individual in Europe and the UK," she said.
9363	We’re not sure of the exact day yet, so stay tuned to this article for more information.
9364	“We’re on a mission to optimize the analog audio output for connected old-school gear.”
9365	We’re really, really tight,” Tanguay said.
9366	We reserve the evening for brainstorming.”
9367	We're so happy to have him with us!
9368	“We responded with one rapid response vehicle and two emergency ambulances.
9369	“We’re stewards of city property and lands for future generations and that does not mean short term,” she said.
9370	“We’re trying to treat South Side Chicago like our big playground,” Riddle said.
9371	We're variously described as helicopters or tigers.
9372	We’re very blessed.
9373	We’re very excited about that.”
9374	“We’re waiting for government directives.”
9375	“We’re warfighter driven and by doing this we’re able to make sure our warfighters are assigned to units they’re most qualified.”
9376	We’re working hard to facilitate their growth.
9377	“We’re working very hard to get those and we expect those in the future,” he said.
9378	We seek to enrich the lives of our singers, our audience, and our community through the power and beauty of choral singing.
9379	“We see this as being a win-win for the environment and the farmers we serve.”
9380	We shall ensure complete transparency in these set-offs.
9381	We shall never forget them.
9382	We share the same culture and references," Ubisoft Film & Television Managing Director Helene Juguet told The Hollywood Reporter.
9383	“We should enable our officers to make the right calls.”
9384	“We should realize the sacrifice they make under the sun and rain.
9385	“We showed that the issue is more politicized in richer countries.
9386	We speak to ex Jomo Cosmos and Bidvest Wits midfielder Mark Haskins and Sihle Ndebele to unpack their season.
9387	We spoke with Senior Counsel Andrew Marshalleck who explained that while he was not directly involved in the matter back in 2017, he currently is affected.
9388	We started out with the Caesar salad.
9389	West Coast tagger Mark Hutchings’ hamstring injury was a sliding doors moment in a game where Dustin Martin carried Richmond superbly.
9390	West Ham fans don't talk football to each other!
9391	We still have the power to change our circumstances for the better.
9392	Westmoreland was fired from his grandfather role on the made-in-Utah Disney Channel series “Andi Mack” after his December arrest.
9393	West Pack and Crazy Crafts staff stand together before the day begins.
9394	WEST SACRAMENTO (CBS13) — California’s gas prices have hit a five-year high.
9395	Westwood looks to push the ball against Negaunee's defense.
9396	We surface these insights to reporters and editors to help guide their decisions about the best way to tell each tale.
9397	“We take our responsibility to our members and our community very seriously.
9398	We, therefore, respectfully, seek the strengthening of our organization, by a strategic reinforcement of our capacity – through the leadership of Messrs Femi Adesina, Garba Shehu and Laolu Akande.”
9399	"We tried zone to try and stop Prenger," Kleman said."
9400	“We try to touch every department and customer use case we can, but one area where we felt we could do a better job is supporting content mark-up and approval flows,” Farrell said.
9401	We urge Iran to let them be reunited with their families."
9402	We used to have a Chinese restaurant near us called the "A Kitchen" which almost everybody I knew called "The farking A kitchen."
9403	“We used to have to give injections every 6 – 12 months, and it was a very difficult treatment with lots of side effects.
9404	We've also used the Sub with a Sonos Connect:Amp and two small compact speakers in a large living room and we've paired the Sub up with the Playbar, Playbase and Beam on separate occasions, all times with and without two Sonos One units as a stereo pair.
9405	We’ve been fortunate enough to raise a bit over $3 million to start this, but we think we need $7.5 million over the next few years,” Knobel said.
9406	We’ve been told, throughout our faith journey, that prayer is a necessary and important part of our daily lives.
9407	“We’ve got to bounce back very quickly,” Thompson said.
9408	We've got to discourage this behavior in our laws," he said.
9409	We've got to get back to our party roots.
9410	We've put up cameras on the roads that are monitored by a security company, which is a great expense.
9411	We’ve ranked them below by capitalization rate.
9412	“We’ve really become the architects of our own misfortune.”
9413	We’ve rounded up our top 10 gift ideas that are perfect to gift to your future spouse this holiday season.
9414	“We want all Torontonians to know they are welcome at Chick-fil-A,” the statement said.
9415	We wanted the mural to literally pop out at the viewer with the same energy as the music."
9416	We want every general hospital to render mental health service.
9417	We want kids to be in a learning environment that is nurturing and safe.
9418	"We want them to feel safe, to claim protection and an asylum claim at the earliest possible point," McAleenan told reporters afterwards.
9419	We want to get her name out there as many times as possible.
9420	We want to preserve our village or what remains of it,” Aoun said in an interview in his office, which is decorated with a giant framed map of Hadat.
9421	We welcome Dennis to the Board of Directors and look forward to utilizing his vast mining experience as the team works towards its PEA.”
9422	We were all scared,” Renouf confided.
9423	We weren’t sure how to go about it and that’s when Aashiq Abu stepped in to distribute it,” he adds.
9424	“We were really fighting, the 19 of us, to be engineers.”
9425	We were told that our job was to feed the world, and we tried to do it the best way we could.
9426	We who have been raped don’t want to be reminded.
9427	We will apply science and innovation to the search for solutions that benefit all of us on the planet.
9428	We will assume as a fundamental deliverable of government, the fostering of national harmony and the maintenance of law and order.
9429	We will be meeting the Deputy Municipal Commissioner, GH Solanki, tomorrow, seeking action against the AMC personnel and what can be done to prevent such incidents in the future.”
9430	We will bring you further details as soon as they come into the newsroom.
9431	We will continue to monitor the situation closely,” Reuters said on Friday in an email sent to The Irrawaddy.
9432	“We will deepen our roots and strike at our enemies,” the statement quoted Netanyahu as saying.
9433	“We will have to invest in extra farm storage, and who will pay for the damaged crops we can’t reap because we don’t have the storage?”
9434	We will make the optional retiree buyout program permanent.
9435	We will meet the prime minister.
9436	We will miss him, his death is shocking, he was everybody’s president, there was no issue of opposition or ruling party he was everybody’s president.
9437	“We will not allow those voices to be silenced or ignored.”
9438	We will not comment on the personal opinions that he expressed in his letter at this time.
9439	We will probably never know the answers to these questions.
9440	We will see soon enough, but while we wait, those of you with a Roku device can find the Apple TV app in the Roku Channel Store.
9441	“We will take every precaution to make sure we do not have another escape.”
9442	"We will use supreme force to make sure that those arms or weapons are not used against the people of Zimbabwe.
9443	We will use the tower and mobile cranes.
9444	We wonder what else fate has in store for her.
9445	“We won it a couple of times at Chelsea and it was the first competition I ever did win,” he said.
9446	“We won’t submit ourselves to people we don’t trust.
9447	WeWork said in statement on Thursday: "As part of our renewed focus on the core WeWork business, and as we have previously shared with employees, the company is making necessary layoffs to create a more efficient organisation.
9448	WF: What types of boats or price ranges were people you talked to looking for this year?
9449	Whaley, an Ohio State law professor, will debut “The Turkey Men” Wednesday at Columbus Performing Arts Center.
9450	What are co-orbital objects?
9451	What are they not telling us?
9452	Whatâ€™s a nice suburban middle-aged Jew like me doing enjoying target practice at the local gun range?
9453	"Whatâ€™s really weird is that music is the number one thing that influences how I feel on the daily," Chance added.
9454	What awaits you, you cannot see.
9455	What chemical might have caused it?
9456	“What constitutes an impeachable offense,” Bazan concludes, “is less than completely clear.”
9457	What could be more American than that?
9458	What Croft was demonstrating was that the triggers of a panic attack are over exaggerated, to the detriment of whoever is experiencing the attack.
9459	What did he think they were about?
9460	What did the winning captain, Kieran Read make of it?
9461	What do Church abuse policies mean by ‘vulnerable adult’?
9462	What does an honorary consul do?
9463	What does it mean to adopt a pet with special needs?
9464	What does this all mean for customers?
9465	What does this mean for the Lynx?
9466	What do the odds mean or how can you really win?
9467	What do we do with this?"
9468	What do you think of her present look?
9469	What effects does contemplative meditation have on our attitudes as they are translated into our physical well-being?
9470	Whatever happens, the threat of some widespread violent uprising is nil.
9471	Whatever the case, it is now clear that the BEE deal with CSR originates at Transnet.
9472	What explains the announcement?
9473	What goes into the Global Competitive rankings?
9474	What has prompted repeated governments to intervene so often?
9475	What has to be done?
9476	What he doesn’t have is quick feet.
9477	What helped vastly for Kalpana was the expert guidance of another ace mountaineer Bachendri Pal who became the first Indian woman to scale the Everest.
9478	“What he’s actually saying without realizing it is that he can afford to support Trump’s business side, because Trump’s racism side doesn’t affect him.”
9479	What he said was so surprising and new that it was as if I had gotten into a conversation with a seat-mate, a stranger on a train, someone unknown you were making small talk with while flying to France.
9480	“What he’s trying to do is an interesting cultural straddling,” said Kris Brown, the president of Brady, the gun safety group.
9481	What if the person was just going back inside to get his hat?
9482	What if this killer whale has been crafted with specifications that include 35,000 plastic-bottle caps?
9483	“What I’m looking for are boys who will be sparky, engaged,” he said.
9484	What impressed you on a pre-PPV week?
9485	What is Hemp Biodiesel?
9486	What is it like working in the forest?
9487	What is notable about the situation is how much it runs parallel to that of 20th Century Fox's 2015 reboot.
9488	What is not strong is the claim that we know what’s going to happen next, or that we can do anything about it.
9489	What is Polarized?
9490	What is the total cost to vaccinate four children from birth until adulthood?
9491	What it takes, how hard we work through the disrespectful challenges, just to make art,” she tweeted.
9492	What, other than political bias, can explain the FBI’s egregious misconduct?
9493	What prompted your decision to move here?
9494	What's a bit intimidating but very exciting?
9495	What Sani Card Reader want, is to silence the voices who expose the hypocrisy of opportunists and usurper of public good.
9496	What’s appreciative about the development of this couple is it allows viewers to have a closer look at who Wei Wei is as a person.
9497	WhatsApp’s Dark Theme is not available as of now and there is no word on when the feature will be rolled out for users.
9498	What’s changed is I think there’s no longer this belief that going public is something that you have to do.
9499	What should be of real concern to Republicans — from President Donald Trump on down — looking for insight from the 2019 elections into what will happen next year is that this suburban flight from the Republican brand isn’t new.
9500	What's it going to be this week?'
9501	What’s really special about aluminum is that it’s infinitely recyclable.
9502	What's Steve Bannon up to?
9503	What started as an opportunity to help her daughter, turned into more than a decade of helping others.
9504	What’s the over/under on this game?
9505	What that actually will look like remains to be seen.
9506	What these people did is incredibly dangerous to people with epilepsy and it just cannot stand."
9507	What this means is information captured with a HELIAUS® mobile device will be absorbed into a larger data source.
9508	What was at first a fire covering about half a football field had quickly grown, although the cause of the fire was not yet known, he said.
9509	“What was going on with the racism and the cultural differences,” said Frank Loftoa.
9510	What was most disturbing is the nonchalance of the latecomers.
9511	What was the idea of the nudists?
9512	“What we do know, however,” she said, “is that e-cigarettes and other vape products containing nicotine are harmful to the developing brain, which includes the adolescent brain.”
9513	What we mustn’t do is fear change.
9514	“What we saw here is a symptom of a larger problem and at the level of the Ministry of Education, we have undertaken several initiatives under a broad umbrella of the school health programme.
9515	What will Boris Johnson do?
9516	When 15-year-old Maddi got grounded, her parents gave her two options for punishment: she could either give up her phone for one whole month, or only lose it for two weeks, but let her parents control her social media during that time.
9517	When a damaging article is released that threatens the strength of the Carrington reputation, Fallon seeks to get ahead of the narrative by fast-tracking a slate-cleaning memoir on a new Dynasty, Friday at 8 PM on WCCB Charlotte’s CW.
9518	When an innocent person is wrongly convicted of a crime, and in Africa, there are thousands of innocent prisoners who arrived there for instance because of corruption, there is an enormous lack of all legal systems to help him to prove his innocence.
9519	When a pop culture symbol isn’t tethered to any particular political demands, it becomes fluid.
9520	When Arthur Mosely moved to East Austin in the 1980's he didn't worry about flooding.
9521	When asked if he was aware of the ruling of Sharia panel, he said “those people are saying rubbish.
9522	When asked if he will be the Chief Minister”>Deputy Chief Minister, Patil said “That has not been decided yet, I don’t know.”
9523	When asked under direct questioning by Shaw, he said without emergency assistance, either stab wound – to the neck or back – could independently result in death.
9524	When asked what he does besides football and studying, he paused.
9525	When asked which characters Blizzard would be willing to have appear in Super Smash Bros. Ultimate director Jeff Kaplan told that Nintendo can have any character it wants.
9526	When Aug. 24 comes around, you need a plan.
9527	When a white Dallas police officer who killed an innocent black man in his own living room was sent off to prison this week with a hug from the victim’s brother and the black judge on the case, some saw it as a moment of amazing grace and redemption.
9528	When Brig. Gen. Anthony C. McAuliffe of the 101st Airborne received a Dec. 22 ultimatum to surrender or face total destruction, he offered one of the most famous — and brief — replies in military history: ""Nuts."
9529	“When complaints are received, we may also provide the uploader a chance to remove or edit private information in their video.”
9530	When contacted by Vanguard, Oba Owolabi Olakulehin said they deemed it fit to visit the Olubadan palace to congratulate him on his 91st birthday.
9531	When Cori Matheson was a young girl, golfers were stereotyped as gray-haired businessmen who smoked stogies between shots.
9532	When DeCample was diagnosed with liver cancer at the early age of 41 in May 2016, he approached the disease with a dose of comedy and transparency not often witnessed by public figures.
9533	When did Kvyat and Piquet start dating?
9534	When dispatch signals an incident, she needs to act quickly.
9535	When evil seems to revisit their hometown, the adult Losers return for a rematch with the morphing clown.
9536	When George Hearst offers to buy it, and in a clearly nefarious way, Charlie pridefully refuses.
9537	“When he became vice president, the kid decided to go around the world and say, ‘Hire me because I’m Joe Biden’s son.’
9538	When he was appointed by former Mayor Richard M. Daley in 2009 to replace departing Inspector General David Hoffman, Lightfoot was among those who vouched for and recommended her friend Joe Ferguson.
9539	“When he was the chief minister of Gujarat, he had expressed concern over the rising onion prices,” it noted.
9540	“When I asked them what was going on with the bench he told me no one could figure out whose responsibility it was to fix it, so they were going to take it down,” George said.
9541	When I become the Governor of Wokun-je Nation, I won't pick up the same title of Excellency.
9542	When I finally got out, an old broken mirror fell, shattered, almost injured me and damaged my tires.
9543	When I first met Pat, he was new to Beaufort and Beaufort High, his dad, Colonel Don Conroy, having been transferred to the United States Marine Corps base at Parris Island, Beaufort’s local military base.
9544	“When I got to college I was very good at architecture and had gone to architecture camps in high school.
9545	When I realised that the student was actually a man, I decided to proceed normally and wait for the Military Police to take action."
9546	When it comes down to it, they were messing with the timeline of the entire Marvel Cinematic Universe.
9547	When it comes to student involvement in politics, she says, “I think we all have a responsibility to be involved at some level.”
9548	"When it comes to the unionized sector, there is no flat rate and we'll never go there," he said.
9549	When it launched 11 seasons ago, it did the same with the hosting talent: their fame and rapport grew with the show.
9550	When I told him, his voice dropped to a whisper.
9551	When I turned, I saw that the first tricycle was trying to run over a crossroad and suddenly a girl ran out of it and escaped.“
9552	When I was approached by The Brexit Party recently to help them secure and mine their data for mass marketing, part of me was pleased that they were, unlike the Leave.
9553	When MacKay got the call from Marvel to write a Daredevil miniseries, he says it was 'daunting' but he's pleased with the result.
9554	When Matthews asked Peduto about how to convince people who live in areas with a strong “gun culture,” the Mayor responded by saying the push is not to take away guns, but to pass universal background checks and red flag laws.
9555	"When Men are employ'd they are best contented.
9556	When most people think of getting a change of scenery, a vacation is the first thing that comes to mind.
9557	When one sees high inflation, the RBI comes to mind.
9558	When our three children were growing up, my husband and I tried to model healthy food choices.
9559	When people ask questions online, do them the courtesy of acknowledging and responding to them on time.
9560	When people offer to help, let them – be it bringing food, picking up the kids or watching a box set with you.
9561	When people see this airport some of dem does think how China got so much money that it can waste it on one airport.
9562	"When push comes to shove, the Iraqis don't want to piss off the Iranians.
9563	When Rey and Chewbacca first encounter porgs, they're a nuisance, constantly hassling Chewie while he tries to repair the Millennium Falcon, and trying to interfere with Rey's Jedi training.
9564	When she entered the hospital requesting a legal abortion, the medical authorities had a duty to protect her life and health.
9565	When she struggled to balance music and chemistry, Balasubramanian encouraged her to focus on music, pointing out that, after all, not everybody could sing and that she could always return to chemistry later.
9566	When skateboarding in real life, there's a learning curve and learning how to do perform a Christ air could take months if not years of practice.
9567	When someone (okay, me) namechecks ‘OxiClean’ they’re most likely referring to this stuff, the OG standard formula.
9568	When students walk in, they will find an open door, pictures of his grandkids taped onto his computer and a pin on his jacket that reads “I was first in my family to go to college.”
9569	When Suprum was sentenced to probation, he was ordered by a county judge to undergo an anger management assessment, a mental health evaluation and batterer’s intervention.
9570	When temperatures are warmer, rats are likely to reproduce more.
9571	“When the game was on the line, I’m real proud of the offense flipping the field and real proud of the defense ending the game the way it did,” Auburn coach Gus Malzahn said.
9572	When the group tested their catalyst in the lab, they found that the yield for fuels such as ethane, propane and butane was much higher than their previous catalyst.
9573	When the media cycle moves on it feels like everyone has forgotten you.
9574	When the parents tried to intervene, the court heard, they were punched and then arrested.
9575	When there’s a will, there’s a way as the saying goes and Dr Farah Roslan showed that Malaysians are able to adapt in various working conditions while still being devoted to their faith.
9576	When the woman attempts to walk past him, Elliott blocks her path with his body.
9577	When they broke, thousands lost their homes and their neighborhoods.
9578	When they emerged, they were a different team.
9579	When they fall back to lower states, the energy is released in the form of light, similar to the way a neon light works, according to the NOAA.
9580	When they lost Manning and then proceeded to do the same dumb stuff with Luck…
9581	When this happens, the first thought that crosses my mind is that this person is not over his or her ex, likely listing qualities that are the opposite of what was present in the last relationship.
9582	When tracking resources don’t add meaningful functionality to the page, we may even block them entirely.”
9583	When Twitter got wind of Fin’s post, it went viral, currently standing at almost 60,000 retweets and more than 3.6 million views – or listens, to be more accurate.
9584	When two or three are dancing, you can focus on individuals.
9585	When Virat Kohli announced his side at the toss, there were a lot of apprehensions over the decision to axe Ravichandran Ashwin and include Ravindra Jadeja as the lone spinner in the side.
9586	When was the last time you could say the Saints’ defense would win them the game?
9587	"When we are in full operation, we will have more than 400."
9588	When we started to dig into the story, we found out that the true story is actually not nearly as exciting as it seems at first.
9589	When will any local bank rise?
9590	When you compete all the time and play hard these things happen.
9591	"When you consider that alongside other issues in the Strait of Hormuz, other issues in the global economy, those issues are concerning," he told reporters in Canberra.
9592	"When you get used to driving on our system and then you're all of a sudden on the other system where you're driving - it happens.
9593	When you hire a lawyer, your chances of overpaying are considerable, according to one legal expert.
9594	When you invest in peace at home and abroad, peace invests in you in ways that are infinite.
9595	When you look at the quality.
9596	“When you’re dropping into zones and you have guys with long, big wingspans, it makes it harder for them to throw into windows.”
9597	When your employees and consumers feel understood and supported, hard conversations can become easier because they know your interests are genuine.
9598	When you’re the most powerful student on campus, you can’t let your emotions get in the way.
9599	When you still have a group or community identity—and this going on right now particularly throughout the Global South—the leaders of different groups, whether they be religious or ethnic, are encouraging their own numbers, first of all, to proliferate.
9600	When you try and control a smart lock from Apple's Home app while you're at work, for instance, the hub's job is to check your ID before letting you in.
9601	When you watch it, is it with a more critical eye knowing how difficult to get some of these shots and how dangerous some of those shots were?
9602	Where Are The Highest Paying Jobs In Africa?
9603	Where do we draw the line?
9604	Where have all the MPs gone?
9605	Where in hell does a media organization yet struggling to pay reporters’ salaries have the legal fees to pursue interminable libel suits filed by politicians?
9606	Where in Igboland are strangers accorded the privileges being enjoyed by Igbo in Lagos and Yorubaland?
9607	Where is Ajebutter?
9608	Where’s that energy now?
9609	Where the death ruse is concerned, he’s totally discounted the psychological impact on his family, especially on Summer Newman (Hunter King) and Connor Newman (Judah Mackey).
9610	Where to go for dental research?
9611	Whether it is drinks or brunch; The Dylan is the perfect place to be.
9612	Whether or not the league is willfully complicit, the widening skepticism in its ranks is Manfred’s shame.
9613	Whether or not the series would’ve followed her comic storyline will never be confirmed now that she won’t be getting a second semester.
9614	Whether that terminally ill person has been living with a disability is irrelevant.
9615	WHETHER the police lawyer played by is bent or not, she has reason to resent Ted.
9616	Whether they are my fans or not, I don’t regulate or determine their behaviour or conduct.
9617	Whether you’re a women’s football fan or not, you could learn a thing or two from watching the athletes conquer the field and achieve their lifelong goals.
9618	“Which I know my mom and grandpa, they hate it,” Paleen said.
9619	Which is good news for anyone looking to buy a place that is an ideal location and in excellent condition.
9620	Which is why it's so strange to see “fan service” derisively bandied about when those stories succeed in those goals.
9621	Which makes it a perfect subject for a ballet adaptation, because ballet bypasses language to build its stories purely out of emotion.
9622	Which region will be less affected by the coming climate crisis: New Zealand or Alaska?
9623	While addressing the court, prosecutor Sebastian Mutizirwa indicated that the State had shifted its position and was consenting to Sanyanga’s admission to bail.
9624	While a man is guilty until proven innocent.
9625	While a small group of Omega Sentinels reappeared in 2015, they were seemingly just another minor threat on the X-Men's long list of enemies.
9626	While both leaders remain in New York on Monday, the meeting is looking even less likely than before.
9627	While construction is going on, the writing center has been temporarily relocated to the southwest corner of the library.
9628	While Epstein’s alleged crimes were deplorable, the world tuned into the scandal because of who the billionaire was friends with.
9629	While falling short of implementing full-fledged across the state, a new law places major restrictions on annual rent increases and further restricts landlords’ ability to evict tenants.
9630	While Ford has brought some Mustang cues inside the Mach-E, this is a design that definitely takes advantage of being electric.
9631	While frequently called Spanish flu, the disease did not originate in Spain.
9632	While gold enjoys all the spotlight, its poor cousin silver has been riding on its coattails and enjoying the safe-haven rally.
9633	While he has yet to pitch at Yankees Stadium this year, he picked up a victory against them in Houston when he struck out six over seven innings.
9634	While her circumstances have come full circle, who Daenerys has become internally has not.
9635	While Israel is a Jewish democracy with equality among its citizens, only the Jews can identify with the essence of the State.
9636	While it likely felt to those at Microsoft that they were learning lessons in the most painful way possible, they learn, and the result has been Satya Nadella’s Microsoft.
9637	While it's clear they look visually similar and there's a general thread of modification and repair throughout a lot of Attia's work, it often feels like the connections he's drawing are very loosely affiliated.
9638	While Kiwis are yet to pass judgment on the measures, the opposition National party has previously flagged their dissatisfaction.
9639	While many American students are still leaving high school without a plan for the future — there are more affordable options available every day.
9640	While many of these mysteries factor into the main story and are explained over time, the explanations for some are occasionally lost in the shuffle due to the sheer amount of mysteries that piled up from the very first episode.
9641	While many smartwatches are water-resistant today, from the Apple Watch Series 4 to the Kate Spade Scallop 2, not all have sapphire crystal over the screen.
9642	While Melaye rejected campaign director general’s role, Wada chose to take a back seat.
9643	While moving the motion, Sadipe told the House that that Egypt and Nigeria accounted for the largest inflows of remittances into Africa in 2018 with Nigeria leading on the Continent in terms of remittance receipts in 2017.
9644	While no predictor, the Democrats' 2018 congressional victory was unusually large, and support for Republicans closely mirrored Trump's approval numbers.
9645	While opposing the bail application of Gupta, the NIA had told the court that Gupta used to release Tariq Lone’s consignments.
9646	While other fans said this estimate was out by a couple of years, most seemed to agree that this meant Nessa was in her mid-fifties.
9647	While Pallab Lochan Das (41), Minister of State with Independent charge of Labour and Employment and Tea Tribes Welfare, is contesting from Tezpur, sitting MP Rameswar Teli (49) is fighting from Dibrugarh.
9648	While senior QB Steven Montez is a lock for the starting role, the annual Spring Game was an opportunity for coaches and fans alike to see a glimpse of the team’s bright future.
9649	While social media has essentially free reign over our data in many parts of the world, often without our knowledge for purposes that are not necessarily in our interests, medical research is now tightly regulated and controlled.
9650	While some photos showed Reginae in selfie mode, others appeared to have seen the star place her camera in front of her.
9651	While speaking at Dallas West Church of Christ, Botham’s father Bertram said, “I’m not really surprised because we know how we raised him… The Holy Spirit was working,” Bertram said.
9652	While the APC team perfected its strategies on the political turf, it appeared to have also did same on the judicial front.
9653	While the BBC has relinquished its dominance over most genres, it remains the pre-eminent maker of natural history programmes, according to Fothergill.
9654	While the Chairman of the Central Council of Emirs will be appointed by the governor, who will chair the Council for two years, it is again the prerogative of the Governor to make sure that the Chairmanship goes round all the 5 Emirates.
9655	While the Commissioner of Police is busy setting up a task force, the Andrewin family is u…
9656	While the company explained the changes to some FAA officials, it didn’t tell those directly overseeing flight-control systems, the report said.
9657	While the current tests are focused on finding PFAS in drinking water, the widespread use of this compound in consumer products for decades has been “well-documented by national health monitoring data.”
9658	While the effect has historically been observed almost exclusively in and ocean fisheries, there has been little evidence of the effect in freshwater ecosystems.
9659	While the exact history of the masked carnival characters isn't known, they are thought to be connected to farming celebrations which encompass customs that go back to medieval times.
9660	While the green carpet starts at 6.30 pm, the main event will commence at 8 pm.
9661	While the highest-end models now retail in excess of $1,000, the standard phones are still placed in a relatively affordable price bracket.
9662	While their snub may have seemed consequential to you in the moment, it's likely they haven't given it a second thought.
9663	While the McGowan Government has not shied away from social issues, the Premier will be keen to get this debate off the agenda.
9664	While the most foul forms of pollution have been cleared, the coast is no stranger to everyday trash.
9665	While the outfit doesn't feature a huge Juicy Couture crown, it's clear who designed it.
9666	“While the reef is already experiencing the impacts of climate change, its future is one we can change – and are committed to changing,” he said.
9667	"While there is a clear track record of Aramco having been run as a commercially independent company, the government's budget is highly reliant upon contributions from Aramco in the form of royalties, taxes and dividends."
9668	While there’s no recreating Luciano, Opera Australia’s leading tenor Walter Fraccaro produces an effective performance in the company’s latest season of Puccini’s final opera.
9669	While the results here are not entirely unexpected, they can certainly be instructive when deciding between topical areas when creating content.
9670	While the Sanders campaign initially guaranteed its employees salaries equivalent to at least $15-an-hour, field staffers alleged that long hours had caused their wages to drop below that threshold.
9671	While the terrorist group actually refers to itself as "Daesh" as well as "ash-Shām", the acronym ISIS has been used by Western leaders to easily describe the "Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" in recent years.
9672	While the TV show Game of Thrones has come to an end, there are still plenty of stories in Westeros, Essos, and Sothoryos that are still left to tell.
9673	While this is viable solution, it is a very unstructured and unsustainable solution for an era when Treasury issuance and financing needs are only going up.
9674	While this year’s Emmy Awards are set to honor the best and brightest in current television programming, the awards ceremony has honored plenty of famed television shows and characters in the past.
9675	While traditional savings accounts have been hit by interest rates tumbling towards zero, other options are expanding.
9676	While trigger warnings may reduce the surprise of seeing sexual violence, that they neither buffer the psychological impact of disturbing scenes nor steer vulnerable viewers away from them.
9677	While urging stakeholders to ensure total compliance to achieve seamless trade transaction, he allayed fears that the system may be hacked.
9678	While water was leaking around the edges, it was essentially in place, in front of the ramp," Kurm added.
9679	While we might at last have some cracks in the political deadlock, banks have long since pressed the button on relocation plans.
9680	While We’re WaitingLittle known fact:Baerga is the only player to hit a home run from both sides of the plate.
9681	While young donors tend to be healthier, there's no upper age limit: Studies show healthy organs from seniors like Henry, who was 78, and even octogenarians still can work well, especially if given to an older recipient.
9682	White also said that she gets labelled a 'freak' and a 'weirdo' by other prisoners when she attempts to dress as a woman.
9683	White Island Tours is able to set its own policies on whether it will still go to the island if there are signs of volcanic activity.
9684	Whiting Petroleum (NYSE:WLL) last announced its quarterly earnings data on Tuesday, October 30th.
9685	Whitney recently talked about anxiety and life in their 20s on …, and that chat can be heard below.
9686	“Whoa, hey guys this is cool,” a girl dress solely in Pink sweats with layers and layers of bags under her eyes said.
9687	Who among us didn’t learn something from Caroll Spinney’s Big Bird over the years?
9688	Who can blame a girl for wanting to watch her nonsensical Christmas knight movie in heavenly, Alexaless peace?
9689	Who has the most to gain by these attacks?
9690	Who is Damien Molony?
9691	Who is Natalie Portman playing in Lucy in the Sky?
9692	Who is responsible for allowing this man-animal to run around unsupervised?
9693	Who knows what Trump actually believes beyond finding ways to get richer while in office.
9694	Who Looks Like Christina!
9695	Who says you need a security company or a guard dog to keep your home safe?
9696	Who the fark in their right mind would wear a 30k watch while walking around on vacation?
9697	Who wants to see a musical about a Russian milkman marrying off his daughters before a pogrom?
9698	Who will evaluate my hair loss and recommend a course of treatment?
9699	Who Will Win the Race for AI?
9700	Why aren’t we on the gold standard now?
9701	Why buy one knife as a gift when you can just give someone a whole set?
9702	Why claim you're trying to draw more tourists to Texas when you're punishing them with increased costs for visiting Texas?
9703	Why does A$AP Rocky keep coming up during the impeachment hearings?
9704	Why don’t they dedicate a whole two hours to a crop of related issues?
9705	Why do you say?
9706	“Why do you young people think we have no moves?” posed an older viewer, speaking on behalf of the elderly dancer.
9707	Why endure and stoke all of the drama?
9708	Why is American business failing to meet market demands?
9709	Why is Cousins sitting on the bench?
9710	Why McIntosh chose to make this particular film her feature debut.
9711	Why must she resign?
9712	Why on Earth do they want to cost profits over a little thing like a small chance of catastrophic failure?
9713	Why they don’t just stop this thing and leh we work together.
9714	Why would he deny wanting anything from Zelensky after asking the Ukrainian president, in the July 25 call, for the investigations as “”?
9715	Why would you hide information that should be shared with the people?”
9716	Why You Should NEVER Salt Your Driveway!
9717	Wide receiver Marcus Simms is also expected to transfer to another school.
9718	WikiLeaks, which published secret US military documents and diplomatic cables in 2010, called Kamphuis's disappearance 'strange.'
9719	Wildlife officials say an endangered squirrel subspecies in southeastern Arizona is fighting its way back after much of its mountain habitat was burned by a 2017 wildfire.
9720	Willamette’s defense stayed strong until the second half, when Kristen Coniglione scored a header off a free kick assist from Peng at 50:03.
9721	Will be donating to his campaign.
9722	Will Buie Jr. in a scene from “In the Tall Grass,” based on a novella by Stephen King and Joe Hill.
9723	Will China’s burning of maps stymie bilateral efforts?
9724	Will consult Naveen Patnaik also because he gave his support.
9725	Will Culbert, portfolio manager at Wesfarmers shareholder Contact Asset Managementsaid Bunnings would be a "critical driver" of the company's earnings.
9726	Will Huntsberry compiled and analyzed lots of data from student surveys to show where kids in San Diego Unified feel safe at school, and where they don’t.
9727	William Lyon Homes has a one year low of $9.85 and a one year high of $32.66.
9728	“(Williams) and I pitch very differently,” Winegarner said.
9729	Williams Companies’ market capitalization is $33.6 billion at a June 7, 2019 stock closing price of $27.76 per share.
9730	WILSONVILLE, Ore. – An Oregon State prison…
9731	Wilson was active on the sidelines during the game cheering on her teammates.
9732	Wilson was transported to Spectrum Health United Hospital in Greenville for treatment with non-life threatening injuries.
9733	Wilson went 21-33 through the air for 208 yards, with Bushman leading in receptions with six for 62 yards, but the offense couldn’t keep up with Utah’s 256 yards on the ground.
9734	Wind and weather patterns are funny things, aren't they?
9735	Windhoek- A Namibian company recruiting qualified graduates with excellent command of English to go teach English at Chinese private schools in Asia have refuted claims that this is a human trafficking syndicate.
9736	Winning that contest granted them a pizza party sponsored by Clay County Bank.
9737	Winnipeg is coming off consecutive losses, including a 33-13 decision to Hamilton last week, the Bombers' first at home this season.
9738	Winters with extreme air pollution.
9739	Winter wheat and oats were starting to sprout and cover the ground with some stands reaching 2 inches in height.
9740	With Aberdeen playing in the League Cup last eight at Tynecastle the focus is on the Dons’ bid to win silverware.
9741	With a couple of hours’ worth of occasionally irritating head-scratching, there’s a slight sense of having played the intro to a much larger game.
9742	With a government focused on reining in spending, how the private sector's access to finance will be addressed is not clear.
9743	With a population of more than 400 students, the original school building can no longer accommodate its numerous sports, activities and high school classes.
9744	With a proven wicket taker like left-arm quick Junaid Khan and young up and coming tearaway pacer Mohammad Hasnain in the side, captain Shoaib Malik might be inclined to to bring in one of the two.
9745	With Chris now gone as well, that leaves editor Ray Cooney and Jack.
9746	With each new season focusing on a different generation of Joestar, various countries that have been visited include Italy, Japan, Egypt and many others.
9747	Witherspoon, Whitt and Phillips are all from Pleasant Grove.
9748	With hardly any funds to hire vehicles, she travelled in State transport buses to reach voters.
9749	With helpful 80ish-word article including almost no detailsReal news.
9750	With his arms up, he handed himself over to the Kurdish militants in the hope of eventually being repatriated to Belgium.
9751	With his blue skin, he looks like the Hellmouth's version of a Smurf.
9752	With how tight the two teams were playing, a one goal lead wasn’t safe.
9753	With immense pride and satisfaction in his eyes, it is only expected that Tiger Woods would go on to break the record held by Jack Nicklaus who holds 18 major titles in the sport.
9754	Within days of the Gilroy shooting, a gunman killed 22 people at a Walmart in El Paso and another man gunned down nine people outside a nightclub in Dayton, Ohio.
9755	Within the financial and insurance industries in particular, the report found 927 incidents, with 207 involving confirmed data disclosure.
9756	Within the first six minutes of playing time, Childs managed to score 13 points, which included three shots hit behind the arc and a dunk to finish it off.
9757	Within the last three years, guards have reported that one terrorism suspect had left a “drop note” containing coded messages in the recreation room for his co-defendants to find.
9758	With its large and fast-growing population, waste lands, disappearing water resources, Ethiopia is plagued by drought, increasingly deadly conflict over land, and meagre economic opportunities.
9759	With just 13 seconds left in the first period, Logan Hutsko fed David Cotton from behind the net, and the recently-named Hockey East First Team selection snuck it past Lindberg.
9760	With just weeks to the next General Election, what does Ipsos MORI say about the popularity of parties and their leaders?
9761	With La Danza del Sur, Malintzin, Bounce and their partner Alex Pean are building regional momentum for uplifting artists and activists of color.
9762	With LED screens, pedestals and sculptures, it aims to highlight the effects of plastic pollution.
9763	With MIM chief Asaduddin Owasi urging Muslims to vote for the TRS, the party hopes that it will get a majority of the minority votes in Secunderabad area.
9764	With more women breaking into tech, this is starting to change, she said - but slowly.
9765	With no long lines or pushy shoppers Kale's makes the perfect stop for your families Santa photos.
9766	Without a public plan it appears they lack fiscal responsibility.
9767	Without it, the department might not be able to respond to highway crashes, says Lorne Head.
9768	Without leadership and buy-in from the top, these kinds of measures are rarely viewed as a priority.
9769	Without the intervention, the victim’s education would have been truncated.
9770	With over 550 employees in 23 locations nationwide, Tilson builds high-performing technology project teams who take on the largest and most impactful information infrastructure projects in the country.
9771	“With regard to school clothes, schools will continue to supply all students.
9772	With ridiculous cumulative voting, anything is possible.
9773	With rising prices, Davis may have scrambled to find steady work.
9774	With roots as an artists’ colony, Westport remains a creative hub.
9775	With spirits riding high from the positive movement in August, September started with much optimism.
9776	With such a strong move, the two moving averages are now at the same level.
9777	With that being said, Mike was eliminated from the show.
9778	With that constant supply of stifling defense, it’s no wonder Murphy provides such a stabilizing effect on the unit overall.
9779	With that, I always remember that there is literally no downside to reaching out to someone.
9780	With that knowledge, on Monday morning.
9781	With that performance I'd say it would almost have been impossible for anyone to have beaten me.'
9782	With the 2020 election making prisoners’ voting rights a national priority, this is our opportunity to harness the energy being created by recent presidential campaigns’ discussions.
9783	With the argument continuing "for quite a while" and Pencille "really shouting", she said her path out of the carriage was blocked.
9784	With the Canadians trailing 3-0, the 18-year-old from Saint-Eustache, Que., caught his leg in the pads of Russia goaltender Amir Miftakhov as he skated across the crease at the 18:24 mark of the second.
9785	With the combination of our multi-modal transportation management system and expertise, we use our information advantage to deliver smarter solutions for our more than 124,000 customers and 76,000 contract carriers.
9786	With the confirmation of Judge Barbara Lagoa to the Eleventh Circuit, President Trump has now transformed three of the nation's federal appellate courts from Democrat-appointed majorities to Republican-appointed majorities.
9787	With the desire for more realism in the game, the basic gameplay engine remains the same, so do not expect any huge alterations when it comes to controls and playability.
9788	With the Eifman Ballet’s performance Tchaikovsky PRO et CONTRA travelling through the city May 9–11, I thought it would be a great experience to sit and watch the work of Russian choreographer Boris Eifman.
9789	With the election only days away, someone is targeting voters by mailing residents lists of names and addresses — and information on whether those people voted or not in three elections between March 2016 and March of last year.
9790	With the help of Salisbury police, the OCPD detective was able to determine the identity of the resident of the apartment where the sub shop food was delivered and went to the address to interview the man.
9791	With the local RnB still struggling to establish itself as a solid mainstream genre, Tony X said he aspires to pioneer the genre’s rebirth.
9792	With the look of a classic cowboy or mining prospector, an infectious sense of humour and a detailed knowledge of Prairie history, Chopping easily fits into the surroundings he’s created.
9793	With the Mavs up and shot clock winding down midway through the third quarter, Doncic took a pass and sent up a one-handed 3-pointer.
9794	With the new cases, the total number of polio-affected children rose to 44 in the current year.
9795	With the regular occurrence of foot-and-mouth disease in this region, equipment is tested to cook beef products on a consumer-acceptable basis that complies with the recommendations of the International Animal Health Organisation.
9796	With the score tied at 1-1, Gannon struck for three runs in the third on Beach’s bases-clearing double.
9797	With this being the first NXT Championship match on the USA Network, I have no doubt that both Dream and Strong will go all out to leave a lasting impression.
9798	With this in mind, it’s no surprise that the blockchain and cryptocurrency communities have so readily embraced Dorsey’s support for Bitcoin.
9799	With this in mind, might cable operators start to seriously look at ditching HFC and going with fiber-to-the-home?
9800	With Thompson out for the remainder of nonconference play, Sealy brought in Chang and sophomore setter Hawley Harrer to run a two-setter offense.
9801	"With three new coaches and a host of exciting new players stepping up to the plate, I'm sure the four South African franchises will want to build on the Springboks' achievements this year.
9802	With today’s deal, Lion will also pick up another San Francisco-based beer company — Magnolia Brewing.
9803	With two outs, Fallers doubled to deep right-centerfield to score Alexander.
9804	With two types of hyaluronic acid, this melt-into-your-skin cream gives your complexion a weightless dose of moisture with each use.
9805	With very little at personal stake, legislators and members of Congress find it easy to lay problems over for study or the next session.
9806	With Westwood boys lacrosse having defeated Dover-Sherborn for the first time in program history last spring, each side had it out for Wednesday afternoon’s rematch in Raider country.
9807	Wittmer said they have previously partnered with Tate Williams, founder of CoBuild, on a single-family home in the Northeast and wanted to expand that partnership to include their new coffee shop location.
9808	Woeful injury luck for the former Torino custodian hasn’t helped but, still only 26, a move before the window shuts would serve as a reboot.
9809	Wold’s love for music started early; he said his mother tells him he wanted to play saxophone when he was just two years old.
9810	“Women and young girls on tribal lands are dying or missing at a far higher rate than anywhere else,” Meyers said.
9811	Women are denigrated all the time in the workplace.”
9812	Women are more likely to die if they have a cardiac arrest in public 'because people fear performing CPR on them could be seen as sexual assault'
9813	WOODBURY – Speeding on town roads continues, and in fact is “not getting any better,” despite strong police presence and repeated pleas for drivers to slow down, according to First Selectman Barbara K. Perkinson.
9814	WordPress enables you to configure your website.
9815	Words and terms are created, often used interchangeably, misused, abused, corrupted and discarded without regard to the real meaning or any impact on the business.
9816	“Words I thought I’d speak first at my wedding, not my rape trial.”
9817	Workers at BHP’s Escondida copper mine, the world’s largest, nonetheless initiated a five-hour strike Tuesday morning, union officials told Reuters.
9818	Workers then struck in October.
9819	Working with staff TenSquare discovered widespread irregularities in students’ records.
9820	Work Resume enables you to make your own very own personal brand symbol in three moments or two.
9821	WorkSafeNB official Angela Francoeur said the industry has done a lot of work to improve the level of safety on fishing vessels.
9822	Works councils, which are committees elected by workers in their workplaces meant to serve as a vehicle to register concerns and resolve disputes with management, even in workplaces that are not union-organized.
9823	World Skating champion Meagan Duhamel stops off in Gananoque.
9824	Worse would be declaring a SOE and thiefs still looting as there are no boots on the ground!
9825	Worthy to note is that when you need help, the first and closest people you run to are family, friends, colleagues and neighbours, and not the so called politicians.
9826	Wouldn’t it be great if someone kept tabs on your check-ups before your next visit to the physician?
9827	Would they have allowed Tea Party protestors to harass Obama staffers?
9828	Wow: Billie, 17, also took home three awards, winning Best New Artist, PUSH Artist of the Year, and Best Editing for 'bad guy'
9829	Wow, is he a gynecologist?
9830	Yang Ming, 37, had accidentally touched live wires on a building site and the shock sent him flying backwards onto the protruding metal rod.
9831	Yari further absolved the presidency of the allegation that the present administration was planning to rig the election saying the president has promised that he is not taking the “election in any way as do or die”.
9832	Yarmolenko is a player we have been watching closely for this column, aware that his modest £5.9m price tag could be a steal if he plays regularly and finds form in an exciting West Ham attack.
9833	Yeah, hiring someone with NO front office experience to run a front office is working out well in San Francisco too.
9834	“Yeah, oh yeah … we would never abuse her, we never abused any of our kids,” Carrillo responded.
9835	“Yeah, the first goal is totally on me, obviously,” Rask said.
9836	Yeah, we have 17% in North and South America, 12% in Middle East, Africa and Europe 26%, so overall strong growth adding to this 17% which I mentioned before.
9837	Year 2019 will also see It: Chapter 2 and The Shining sequel Doctor Sleep.
9838	Years of mismanagement and corruption brought the Anna Hazare andolan and anti-corruption movement.
9839	Year-to-date, IWM has declined -3.21%, versus a 0.12% rise in the benchmark S&P 500 index during the same period.
9840	Yellowstone National Park has also announced its schedule for resumption of operations there.
9841	Yeni’s arrival fits with the growth in places offering food from around the eastern end of the Mediterranean.
9842	Yep, another one.
9843	Yes Bank co-founder Rana Kapoor is in talks with Paytm founder Vijay Shekhar Sharma to sell stake in the bank, according to various media reports.
9844	“Yes, I have to sustain the level I have been playing at.
9845	Yes, I think we should be getting paid in a data dividend.
9846	Yes, it’s the finale for most who aren’t fortunate enough to continue playing at the next level, which causes some well-understood tears.
9847	Yesterday 17,990 fresh tweets about Bitcoin were sent out into the world.
9848	Yesterday, the distraught mother of the two men, Margaret France, said that on Wednesday last around 10:30 hours, the two men had left her home to set a seine in the ocean.
9849	Yes, there is a genuine divide (on the Bill).
9850	“Yes we have the freedom of speech, media freedom and so on, but it comes with responsibility.
9851	Yes, you have to press a buzzer to get in, but once inside, the service could not be warmer.
9852	Yet Disney’s D23 expo this weekend might reveal more details on who Harington will.
9853	Yet if we look to the icon of conservative politics and "keeping Britain safe", we have someone with a well-documented history of being a terrorist sympathiser.
9854	Yet, in an inauguration speech, delivered on 26 August 2018, Mnangagwa stated, “The Zimbabwe we want is a shared one and transcends political party lines.
9855	Yet more exploitation of identity politics.
9856	Yet none have proven Test pedigree.
9857	Yet none of us know them.
9858	Yet the Board of Supervisors overwhelmingly passed legislation exempting stock options from payroll taxes, so Twitter would not have paid tax on stock options even without the “Twitter” tax break.
9859	Yet the image of the selfie-taking narcissist does not cut it when it comes to how a narcissist behaves online.
9860	Yet the parallels between their inflammatory claims was jarring.
9861	Yet we also need comedians who can prick our own pomposity as much as we need some in our bubble — a Bill Hicks-type to go with the Bill Mahers, perhaps.
9862	“Yet, you also have much to offer.
9863	Y., has called ICE detention centers for illegal aliens “concentration camps,” invoking Nazi Germany.
9864	Y.), Ilhan Omar (D-Minn.) and Rashida Tlaib (D-Mich.) wouldn’t have much impact on the U.S.-Israel relationship.
9865	Yitzhar is not an isolated phenomenon, as some tried to represent it this week.
9866	Yogev Alcalay wins four gold medals in laser sailing competition, becoming the youngest top scorer ever in the boys under-18 category.
9867	Yomiuri ace Tomoyuki Sugano surrendered a third-inning solo homer to Tomohiro Abe.
9868	Yorgos Lanthimos to Direct Jim Thompson Adaptation ‘Pop.
9869	You always deal with who you were, in your past.
9870	You and the rest of the complainers can stick it as our leaders know what they are doing and once CHEC and Decco get it going everyone will be proud.
9871	You are able to find a variety of great resume templates and also make an educated choice.
9872	You are conducting some of those investigations alongside the DOJ.
9873	“You are dangerous in that you present a significant risk of causing serious harm to the public in the future,” she told Khater.
9874	You are hereby directed to take action against the customers/subscribers of your network for sending obscene messages as it is a violation of customer declaration in the customer application form.
9875	“You are the one thing in this world, above all other things, that you must never give up on.
9876	You can also bundle it with Hulu and ESPN+.
9877	You can also reach out to students on the class discussion board to organize a study group, or schedule in-person meetings with your professor or TA to discuss course concepts.
9878	You can also test your stress hormone levels every once in a while to make sure they are not too high.
9879	You can bet the rent money that university presidents and media executives would sanction any of their employees for making similar broad, sweeping statements about nonwhite men.
9880	You can expect to pay less for prescription drugs starting next summer due to tweaks to the patent drug system.
9881	You can find quite a lot of kinds of payment approaches today, that individuals and businesses utilize and also you ought to simply accept.
9882	You can imagine Oga is sitting at home, in Ikoyi, and he gets a debit alert for traffic infractions in Lekki PHASE 1, N45,000.
9883	‘You cannot beat a nice rice pudding, especially for breakfast,’ he declared — which left me, as I often am, bewildered by Gino’s idea of an appetising menu.
9884	You can now get a boozy beignet called "Baton Rouge Beignets" at the New Orleans themed resort Port Orleans.
9885	You can pay for things using this balance through Apple Pay, make a payment on your Apple Card or transfer it to your bank account.
9886	You can register online or download a form and mail it in. Spring classes begin Thursday, March 28, and run for six consecutive Thursdays, ending May 2. All classes are offered at the Hutchinson Center on Route 3 in Belfast.
9887	You can rotate the game’s graphics either way and use either Joycon controller to play the game.
9888	You can see so many athletes that are not on one of those rosters.”
9889	You can see the strip in question here.
9890	You can’t be forgotten when you’re being talked about.
9891	“You can’t get a cannabis triple venti today,” said Johnson in an interview on CNBC.
9892	You can’t get to him.”
9893	“You can’t have what’s happening—where police officers are getting sick just by walking the beat,” the notorious germophobe that he had OCD about washing his hands, continued.
9894	You can’t lose two children in one week, it is very sad.
9895	You can’t rely on the Conservatives.
9896	You can't remove those from the city."
9897	You can utilize the details you get right back out of them to aid you.
9898	You come away with the impression that Karl Marx was right in saying that religion was invented by men to keep women down–though he could add repressive cultures in general.
9899	You could see glimpses of it in this match, but working with the still very green Ariel Dominguez didn’t allow for this match to ever really get going.
9900	“You’d be out somewhere, and an electrical storm would happen at random, and you had to survive it.
9901	… You didn’t speak until spoken to.”
9902	You do not have much to offer in the way of shopping in Watertown.
9903	You don’t apply to be Chancellor, you get asked or appointed so it was a huge honour.”
9904	You don’t choose forward to get flooded every year.
9905	“You don’t get a lot of chances to measure a cosmological parameter that shaped the evolution of the universe in the laboratory,” Diana Parno, an assistant research professor at Carnegie Mellon University who works on the experiment, told Gizmodo.
9906	You don't have permission to access /2019/opinion-calling-out-bad-good-blokes/ on this server.
9907	You don't have permission to access /lifestyle/raise-a-glass-to-award-winning-distillery-just-30-miles-from-redditch/ on this server.
9908	You don’t kill people simply because you want to win.
9909	You don’t need to make excuses; you just need to do what you desire.
9910	You'd spent your time buying cassette tapes or trying to find another excuse to visit Nozomi, the flower seller's daughter.
9911	You dumba**es spent $1.6 mil for a stupid worthless festival and yet the incinerator remains shut down because you don’t have money for a control panel.
9912	You feel very close to those people, so it’s hard not to get emotional.
9913	You go even further into the future, projecting far, far ahead, to a day when you’re bedridden in a retirement home, thinking back on this day.
9914	You go figure it out.
9915	You guys could’ve at least made an announcement to let everyone know.
9916	“You have an idea, you work on the skeleton of it and then you present it,” he says.
9917	You have the Box Tops, but it’s not their most famous song, it’s “Choo Choo Train.”
9918	You have the tools that your ancestors didn’t.
9919	You have to have everybody wake up.
9920	"You have to make accommodations for Dad, but it’s worth it.
9921	“You have to sell the American people that this is possible to make it possible.”
9922	You have to tailor your resume to get each and every work which you employ to get.
9923	You have to watch the show to find out.
9924	'You ignored all the warnings given to you and you caused fear to passengers and impacted the safety of the aircraft.
9925	You know as some are leaving, many are coming in, then we go back and check the ratio again.
9926	You know, instead of the word compassion, the fact that the guy would be merciful–merciful would be enough.
9927	You know, that fantastic speed that we have zero chance of ever reaching because physics don't play around?
9928	You know, that's what the students have asked for.
9929	“You know what, guess what, you got it!”
9930	You know what you'll find?"
9931	You'll have inaccurate data on every REIT with joint ventures.
9932	You’ll need to provide your email address, how many people you plan to bring along with you and your personal details such as name, home address and a contact number.
9933	You made it off the Kickoff Show.”
9934	You make my laughs turn into weeps because I pity you.
9935	You may also pick the very best recommendation letter writers but it is not in your own hands.
9936	You may have already seen some of your friends on social media post photos or videos from this exhibit, but it would be worth checking out for yourself.
9937	You may have exhibited the following behaviors or know someone who has.
9938	You may not have mourned, but I did.
9939	You may possibly have for providing goods or some service or labor an invoice.
9940	You may wish to engage Julius Berger for the new Lungi capital.
9941	You might as well drink.
9942	You more than many signs can transform situations.
9943	You must also have an adult conversation with your partner, one that might start: “Sorry, I snooped in your phone, but I noticed that – like most men – you enjoy watching porn.
9944	You must declare all your income and assets to SASSA.
9945	You need to get into the habit of using your specials before you get into the habit of using them expertly.
9946	You need to take it with a grain of salt.
9947	You never know if the road has been washed out."
9948	Young and the Restless (Y&R) spoilers tease that Kyle Abbott (Michael Mealor) could regret pushing Theo Vanderway (Tyler Johnson) too far.
9949	Young students from the Seattle region interact with the 20-foot interactive wall on the main floor of the building.
9950	Young writers could probably benefit by putting a little of themselves in it and reaching for a line that’s a little more unique and more memorable.
9951	You owe everything you have become to God and to your motherland, the Ijaw nation first, before Nigeria.
9952	You put up "no panhandling" signs in respect for your customers.
9953	“You’re always looking for places that are business friendly,” said Bruner, who works for Love’s Travel Stops & Country Stores.
9954	You’re getting your son help from professionals.
9955	“You’re looking at a loss of life and a bucket of water, and each of them should be looked at with the weight of the law,” Mr. Bailey said.
9956	You’re talking a manufacturing hub that needs to be state-of-the-art, that can manufacture one of the most advanced aircraft in the world, a major investment both in real estate and in jobs.
9957	You're young and you're in love!"
9958	Your follower count serves as social proof to indicate you’re a brand worth following.
9959	Your Forex trading strategy must give you a clear set of rules you can follow.
9960	Your resume includes an aim in place of a skilled summary rather than just how you’re satisfy the requirements of a company.
9961	Your support of citizen-initiated sales taxes makes land conservation and educational activities like this possible.
9962	You said you needed another restaurant, so I got you what you needed,” says Ana.
9963	Yousef, from Burnage, south Manchester, had ambitions to become a heart surgeon.
9964	You still won’t get DPAF, the Feature Assistant, or Bluetooth, but at just $50 over the cost of the T7, it’s a good buy.
9965	Youth Akali Dal leader Meetpal Singh Dugri, who had blackened statue of few days back, along with other SAD workers, attempted throwing shoes at three accused.
9966	“You think in similar terms — client and country don’t diverge.”
9967	You tried to kill Thor!”
9968	You’ve been playing in Colorado for a lot of years.
9969	You’ve been spending more time in New York.
9970	You've got to deliver it honey but you look the part!'
9971	You've got to read the cute message Mercy Johnson's sent to her husband on their eighth wedding anniversary.
9972	You weren't a journalist when you, Joey, and company went south instead of north and went right toward Cider Riot, spilling your plans the whole way like a bunch of Scooby Doo villains.
9973	You will be after watching this show.
9974	You will be killing two birds with one stone.
9975	You will get a neoliberal double down, the only way to avoid that is a Corbyn, genuine socialist govt brexit, thus allowing re nationalisation of the rail network and the energy cartel, denuclearization and all sorts of other really good things.
9976	You will have N220billion as salary and you have N74billion as money left.
9977	You will need to regularly follow up with a licensed medical practitioner about the appropriate line of treatment and be extremely regular and sincere with that process.
9978	You will not be missed.
9979	You wish you could have encouraged them more by talking to them or you might wish you could even unsay things that may have been hurtful between you and your love one.
9980	You would have been like 'wow what a great writer, he really painted a picture there'.
9981	“You would take a test from her and think you may have an ‘A’ on it and when you get it back you may have a 75 or 80 or failed it.
9982	Yukon to wrap up the Crowley Classic with a 5th place finish and a decisive win.
9983	Yup, more laws, regulations and rules because we are stupid!
9984	Yup, the recent progress HQ has made with involving volunteers is great to see – helping reduce the workload on staff, meaning HQ can do more and also giving more people a different and enjoyable way of contributing to our party.
9985	Yu started practicing Falun Gong in 1996, through the introduction of a customer.
9986	Yves-François Blanchet has given the Bloc new life.
9987	ZacharyРђЎs guitar playing is classic.
9988	Zacks Investment Research cut Toronto-Dominion Bank from a “hold” rating to a “sell” rating in a research note on Wednesday, April 24th.
9989	Zacks Investment Research raised shares of Kosmos Energy from a “sell” rating to a “hold” rating in a report on Saturday, October 26th.
9990	Zacks’ sales averages are an average based on a survey of research analysts that follow Wyndham Destinations.
9991	Zara Larsson arrives at the MTV Video Music Awards.
9992	Zarif himself faced withering criticism at home once for even shaking hands with the then president, Barack Obama.
9993	Zebra Capital Management LLC’s holdings in National General were worth $1,290,000 as of its most recent filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
9994	Zhestkov could face a sentence of up to five years imprisonment and a fine of up to $7,000.
9995	Zidane’s thoughts have been dominated by Gareth Bale’s future since the Frenchman admitted that the club were trying to sell the Welshman, with every press conference since involving yet more questions about where Bale’s future lies.
9996	Zimbabwean Finance Minister Mthuli Ncube established a Monetary Policy Committee in his latest attempt to stabilise an economy in freefall.
9997	Ziscosteel, which switched off its fourth and last furnace at the height of economic challenges in 2008 which left it saddled with a $2 billion debt has been struggling to court new investors to resume production.
9998	Zsohar said trash has been a constant problem — and another reason the lake would benefit from dredging.
9999	Zulthar: For the Fark liberals: The rural people are paying taxes so a large corporation can import a large number non-citizens with extended families to overrun the local schools.
10000	Zwelinzima and his bodyguard were driving back to Johannesburg from a meeting in Pretoria when his wife Noluthando called.
